# Complete Transcript Compilation
## Healing through Meditation, Mantra, and Color Therapy
### By Lama Glenn Mullin

---

## PART 1
*Source: 01_Glenn Mullin - Healing through Meditation Mantra and Color The .txt*

So the.

In the tradition coming from India into Tibet, the tradition of the great enlightenment coming from Buddha Shakyamuni, it's often said that he put together four very ancient traditions that had been remnants of the great enlightenment masters of the past.

But these had become somewhat weakened, diffused and so on, and spread across vast areas and spreading in those vast areas, took on particular culturalizations.

But he gathered those four great traditions and fused them into the enlightenment tradition that has come down from that time, known as the enlightenment tradition or the Buddhism tradition Sangyegicho, but tradition of purifying the mind and expanding enlightenment qualities.

I think in English, enlightenment is kind of a slightly obscure meaning of.

Has a slightly obscure meaning, although it is inspired by the Asian enlightenment tradition because of the post Renaissance Sophenhauer and all those guys.

Those four traditions being the doctrine of radiance from the western side of Mangada Centerland, the doctrine of the Chakra Nadi, the Kundalini or Chandali yogas, the Tantric yogas from the eastern side, in this case meaning Bengal, Orissa and so forth.

Then the doctrine of bliss from south India lands south, and finally the shamanic traditions of the Himalayas and the northern lands, and fusing those four traditions into a unified whole.

So from that time until today, those lineages have been passed generation to generation, and with each generation has produced some waves of enlightenment beings.

Often those lineages are taught in three ways, known as the shravaka, sometimes also known as hinayana hina, here meaning how to simplify our life and bring our life back to quintessentials.

I think a problem with humans is that they often get distracted and have overly diversified sensual portfolios.

They spread themselves too thin and get caught up in too many little things.

Rather than focusing on quintessentials in general, we can say that the magical display of the senses, everything we see, smell, taste, touch and hear, combined with all of the pushing and pulling that comes from our particular kind of culturalization, tends to push us in one way or another, so that we very rarely have a contact with the quintessential simplicity of our being.

In other words, life for many people becomes so noisy they just don't notice the silence, which is always present, present, which is always pervasive of their experience.

So the first level of teaching, often called or of training, I should say, rather than teaching how to get back to quintessentials, how to get back to basics, to bring one's life into essential balance, harmony and simplicity.

So on that first level of training we have to learn to always be in contact with our own, if you would, inner silence, our own inner place of place, peace.

There the big expression is in Sanskrit is moksha and also nirvana.

How to find a place of moksha, which means freedom to always have the mind relaxed and in a state of freedom and nirvana, stress free, anxiety free.

How to be beyond stress and anxiety regardless of what is going on in our life.

And thirdly, shanti, how always to be a person of peace in everything we do.

Our energy is a peaceful energy, our presence is a peaceful presence that no matter what we're dealing with, if we're walking down the road and suddenly a car hops the curve and comes sweeping towards us, we remain in a state of peace, a state of relaxation, a place of non anxiety.

And I think in the Buddhist world we think this is a natural state.

It's not contrived, it's not invented.

It's something which is our birthright or our heritage.

And it comes to us quite naturally on occasion.

But because humans are creatures of habit, we form conceptual constructs and those conceptual constructs basically start pushing us further and further away from that mode of being.

I personally feel that it is a very strong natural quality of the human spirit.

Because whenever we're in a state of great danger or near death, and I've been in that situation two or three times in my life, on each of those occasions, a sense of total relaxation, total non anxiety, total sense of freedom very instantly arose.

And one of them, I was a young man walking down the road, maybe, I don't know, 17 or 18 or 19, something like that, and I hear a crash and I look up and there's two half ton trucks flying toward me at 50 or 60 miles an hour, I thought, oh my goodness, I'm probably a dead duck.

I am probably a goner.

I should make my bucket list quickly.

No time stood still.

And even though there was less than a second before the truck hit me, there was complete relaxation, complete peace, anxiety free.

And I looked at the truck coming toward me.

And as a young man I had trained quite a bit in martial arts, particularly jiu jitsu.

I thought, what's the softest part of the truck?

So I leaned forward and took two steps and stretched my body out.

If this is like the box of the truck at the back stretched out from hair to hair because there's no solid metal in that part, if you hit a doorknob or the door frame or anything like that, it'll be scrunch, squish, scraggle, crack, crack, crack, munch, munch, munch.

Ouch, ouch, ouch.

And it caught me perfectly and hit me and threw me maybe 40 or 50ft through the air and fortunately landed me on my head.

As an Irishman, we consider the head to be the most protected part of the human body.

Anything else breaks easily, the head is.

But I was very lucky.

I landed in a cornfield.

So there was lots of soft corn that I landed on and no bones were broken.

I was knocked out for about a few minutes.

But at that time, during that experience, there was complete relaxation, complete peace, a state of fearlessness.

All of those qualities we see mentioned in traditional spiritual books about the real nature of the human mind or the human spirit or the human soul.

Another time I was on a very high mountain and started to go into an altitude problem and my heartbeat went very, very high.

And it was in my mind a near certainty that I was.

What were all those things I said?

A dead duck, a goner.

What else?

What other ones?

A dead duck, a goner.

Kicking the bucket.

And once again, this, when that happens, all of the extraneous things, things one thinks about or worries about in life, will I pay the bills?

What's happening with this?

What about my health, my insurance?

What about this and that and the other?

All of that drops away and one comes back to quintessential elements of one's being.

And again, there was a sense of complete peace, complete relaxation, zero anxiety, absolutely no sense of suffering or panic or fear.

And I just sort of sat there for a few moments and looked out over the valley and prepared to be a goner.

But of course, even if you jump out of like an airplane at 6,000ft without a parachute, if your time has not come, you cannot go.

And five beautiful ladies came strolling by and rescued me.

I mean, they didn't physically rescue me.

They just said hello and kept walking on by.

But it wasn't 17,500ft and I was feeling.

I mean, I couldn't move a muscle in my body.

Sometimes at altitude that happens, you just can't reactivate your muscles.

I couldn't reactivate anything.

And these five beautiful ladies walked by.

I mean, they did prostrations going by, actually, which sort of added to the charm.

And so I thought, oh, I better try and kick start this body.

And I remember once I was sitting with one of my great gurus, Lama Tub Din Yeshaya, a true Mahasiddha.

And he had had rheumatic fever as a young man, so had heart damage on his valves, so one valve didn't work.

So his heart was two or three times normal.

And he went through Wisconsin in the mid-70s.

And the doctor took a look and said, oh, you've only got a month or two left to live.

And so I saw him when he came through Darmsley the next time, a few months later, and he said, well, Glenn, I may not see you again.

Doctors say month or two left to live.

And I came to visit my gurus there, which was Ling Rinpoche, Triesh and Rinpoche, which were both of my teachers.

And he said, so anyway, I don't know if we'll see you again, but anyway, if we'll see what the Buddhas and bodhisattvas have in store, then again next year, same time, same place, the next year, same time, same place.

And the last time I saw him, I went up to visit Kevjiling Doji Chang, the Dalai Lama's great guru.

And I had some technical questions to ask him about a translation I was doing.

And Lama Yeshi was in the room when I was there.

So when I went outside, I went above the hill and I.

And they said his health was down quite a bit that time, so we wouldn't be able to visit him.

So I thought, well, he has to come out sometime.

So I sat there for about an hour, and then he came out and I waved, and he sort of walked over and sat with us for three or four of us for maybe half hour.

And he said, well, you know, dear, yeah, this heart, it's a bit of a problem, but three or four times now, it stopped on me.

And so each time when it stopped, I've just relaxed and said to it, okay, okay, now, dear, beat, come on, beat.

And each time after saying that to it a few times, it started beating again.

And I got up and I was able to go for another year.

So he said, it's five years since they said I had two weeks to a month or so to live, and I'm still around.

So I said, I don't know what there, but something's keeping me going.

So on this first level of training, it's how to have a sense always of our own joy, our own spaciousness, our own relaxation, no matter in the midst of whatever is going on, no matter how noisy that is, how busy that is, how chaotic it is.

And as we go through life, we'll have many times when things do get very busy, don't they?

They do get very chaotic.

They do get very dramatic and intense.

But the very first level of training is how to always keep a grip on your quintessential nature.

The Nyingma school of Tibetan Buddhism refers to that as the authentic nature of your own mind, how to stay in touch with your own authenticity.

And what's that referring to?

If you see a butterfly, it's almost like your mind flies out of your body and flies away with the butterfly.

If you see a snake, your mind seems to jump out of your body and become the snake.

How in all those occasions can we maintain this sense of everything we experience is just part of our own inner silence?

It's just part of our own inner theater, part of our own inner spirituality.

Some schools, like the Chittamatrans in India, they used to do this by saying, just say to yourself, everything is just my own mind.

When you see a tiger, you don't really see a tiger, you see yourself seeing a tiger.

So keep the perspective that you are part of everything that's going on and you are really the I or the calm place at the center of the storm.

And to cultivate that.

In Buddhism, normally we do three kinds of training.

The first is a kind of a self discipline.

And self discipline here means trying to live a life which makes us feel happy, healthy and joyful, and also encourages happiness, health and joy in everyone we encounter.

When we talk about the Buddhist Noble Eightfold Path, we call that perfect activity and perfect livelihood.

Those two things by choosing a livelihood, what we do with our living, something that we can feel some joy in, learning to feel joy in it.

And secondly, learning to share that joy with all others in terms of perfect activity, perfect activity, always keeping our actions such a thing, such a way that they contribute to our happiness, our health and our well being, and also the happiness, the health and the well being of others.

So on the Noble Eightfold Path to taught by the Enlightenment masters.

And I thought it's very cute.

Often on American lampshades from the 30s and 40s and 50s and 60s, often you see at the top, holding on the lampshade, they'll have a little eight spoked wheel, which is actually a British copy from the days of the Brits in India, because King Ashok in the second century BC made that the symbol of his rule in India.

And so it became omnipresent on everything.

He put it on all his emblems and on his.

Later, when India got independence from England, they put King Ashok's three lion heads on their coins and on their bills.

If you look closely, you can see the Noble Eightfold Path, the wheel of the Noble Eightfold path.

Now, right livelihood.

A job we can enjoy and feel and at the same time bring joy and good feelings to others, doesn't mean necessarily the nature of our job, because actually, anyone can enjoy doing anything.

You know, there's that great scene in one of the Samuel Clemens, Mark Twain books where he's painting a fence and tells his buddy that, you know, how much fun it is, and he's just doing it for the pleasure.

And the friends says, oh, can I do it?

Oh, no, no, it's too much fun.

If you want to do it, you'll have to pay me.

Okay?

But in reality, you know, you find you meet people who enjoy skiing.

If you can enjoy going down a hill at a very dangerous speed, wearing contraption on your feet which can break your legs at any moment.

And the reality is, we can learn to love anything if we digest it in a particular way or approach it in a particular way.

I remember after my training in India, I came back to Canada and I connected with some of the Tibetans who had been brought over as refugees by the Canadian government.

Many of them had been given a job in an assembly factory where they take a little electronic pieces and just assemble them, doing the same sort of thing over and over and over all day.

And in Tibet, of course, life was just the opposite.

It was completely diverse.

You never did the same thing any two seconds of the day.

It's a big sky and nature living, and there's never ever repetitive activity.

And so I said to them, don't you find it a little bit difficult?

And they said, well, at first, but then we noticed it's a little bit like doing mantras.

So with each compartment we put in, we go, oh, mane pap mehong.

Oh, mane papa.

And at first we'd be a little slow, but then we got faster.

And at the end of the day, we knew just how many mantras we had done, because we were paid by the number of pieces that were completed.

And quite a few hundreds of Tibetans were all brought over by that one, were all given in employment in that one factory.

And similarly, I think there's very few jobs.

One I remember the Dalai Lama's elder brother, for instance, Losang Samten, very highly educated, being the elder brother of the Dalai Lama, had every kind of advantage, you could say, after he came out into being a refugee, could have done whatever he liked.

He took a job as a janitor in a high school in New Jersey.

He wanted to live in New Jersey because quite a few Mongolians had moved there after The Communists take over.

So there are lots of Mongolians which are very close to the Tibetans.

And he had been born on the border of Mongolia and Tibet, and later the Dalai Lama.

And the government, sort of, after he was old enough to retire with the pension, sort of pushed him into coming back to Darmsale and taking over as director of the medical university.

And so I got to know him quite well at that time, and I said, how come you got a job as, like, a janitor?

You could have done anything in the world.

He said, well, you know, being the Dalai Lama's brother gets on your nerves.

After a while, everyone looks at you and says, hmm, Dalai Lama's brother.

I think I'll get to know him.

Little bubbly.

Then I can get to know the Dalai Lama, and maybe he'll be.

So I wanted to kind of just have a simple life where I could wake up in the morning and have my breakfast and go to work and do my job, just do my meditations and my mantras and do my contemplations of love and compassion and patience and da, da, da.

And just do a very.

Live a very ordinary lifestyle away from what I had had from the moment my brother was recognized as a reincarnation of the Dalai Lama.

And he said, I very much loved that job.

It was just so wonderful.

I come in every morning and just, you know, out with the mops and the buckets up and down the hallways, kids would come in and say, oh, hello, Lau Tseung, how are you?

And I'd say, oh, hello, Bob or Linder.

It was a very, very pleasant, pleasant experience.

And he says, and now, of course, they've asked me to come back and help with the medical college, the medical institute.

And so I pretty well had to say yes, because they said it so forcefully.

And they even made the Dalai Lama write me a letter telling me I had to do it.

But he says, I think I would prefer to be back at my old job as janitor, being director.

Everyone comes in and expects you to solve all their problems.

You get sort of dragged into all of the kind of intrigue of, like, different little feuds between different doctors in the hospital.

So this idea with right livelihood, of course, it's important to choose something as a lifestyle that we can do.

Like, for instance, if you're a 75, scrawny weakling with one leg, you shouldn't try to become a boxer or whatever.

You should try to do look at something which suits your physical, mental, emotional makeup to some degree.

But within that field, it's really more a matter of learning, training your mind to be joyful and relaxed, peaceful regardless of what it is that you are doing.

And then on the second level of that training, the training in samadhi.

And samadhi means mental focus.

And so here they make the three qualities.

But most important of those is trempa, a kind of a quintessential self awareness, quintessential self monitoring, that basically always being aware of what it is that's going on in one's life.

How is one's body feeling, how is one's mind, how is one's emotions, where are one thoughts, what are they doing?

And finally, training in wisdom, which in the Buddhist world mostly means trying to create a perfect balance between subject and object, holding whatever it is you expect with the perfect degree of intensity.

Not too tight, not too loose.

As Buddha once put it, like a finely tuned musical instrument.

I think in India they had the lute or something like that, so it was like a four stringed instrument.

Often in Western translations they say a guitar, but we've always got six strings on our guitars.

But when the mind is like a finely tuned instrument, not too tight, not too loose, then everything we experience, we experience with the right degree of intensity.

Too tight and we become anxious, stressed and so forth.

Too loose and we become careless.

We don't bring the intensity of that experience into our life.

Then on the second level of training, the so called Mahayana or Bodhisattva path, learning how to be loving, be loving with every living being we encounter, from bugs to 10th level saints, to be equal loving, to have equal care for each of them, have equal compassion for each of them.

Be equally joyful in the presence of each of them, which is always a little bit of a challenge because it's easier to be joyful in the presence of someone you like than in the presence of someone you find it difficult to like.

Therefore, in terms of the meditations and contemplations, the contemplations on learning how to like everyone is very, very important.

For that reason, many Tibetan lamas who travel the world emphasize the teaching on love and compassion.

Not how to say love and compassion or talk about love and compassion, but how actually to be more loving and more compassionate in your life.

And in connection with that, practicing the six paramita, the six gone beyond qualities, the six applications that carry you beyond.

Beyond what as human.

In the Buddhist world and in the Indian world, we think humans, you're already quite far up the evolutionary totem pole, so you're already kong you're already a high being, Quite a high being.

No insect, no, you know, insult implied to any termites or other bugs that may be living in the building.

But in the Buddhist world, we humans are thought to be a little higher on the evolutionary ladder and to be close to enlightenment.

Very easy for us to tip the scale and just slide into enlightenment.

Therefore, they're called paramitas, the things which carry you beyond.

Learning to always be generous with others, learning to always be ethical with others, learning to always be patient, forgiving, forbearing with others, learning to always be joyously enthusiastic in everything that you do.

I like some of the Tantric texts, some of the part of the Sadhana, after you manifest as the Buddha form, you go, ha, ha.

How can we have that quality with us at all times?

If you meet Donald Trump, if he comes up this way later, when, I don't know, when do you guys have your primaries?

If he comes through and you meet him, you can look at him and say, ha, ha.

Or Hillary Clinton, ha, ha.

But in the Buddhist world, we don't think you should allow these qualities to be reactive.

In other words, you shouldn't depend upon something to make you feel happy, something to make you feel joy, something to make you feel good.

You should learn to always be joyful, be relaxed, feel good without any external stimulus, regardless of what it is externally to learn to always be joyfully enthusiastic about everything.

The way you breathe, breathe with joyful enthusiasm, like whoopee and breathe out whoopee.

So the name of a Buddha.

One of the epithets for Buddha is sugatha, someone who has gone to joyfulness, gone to happiness.

And it's not that this is something extraordinary.

It's not like a Buddha or an enlightened being is anyone different than us.

They're born human, they do a training, and they learn how to cultivate those inner qualities which create that kind of mental, emotional, cultural, intellectual ambiance.

So regardless of what is going on, one presses oneself in the direction of joy.

More important than what is done with that other person is the presence of joy in the doing of that exchange.

If it's a business deal, joyfully doing a business.

If it's having coffee with a friend, joyfully having coffee with a friend, enthusiastically having coffee.

Wow.

This coffee.

Oh, and the fifth one, Jian, is similar to the second in the three higher trainings from the Noble Eightfold Path, Jnana, there just meaning the same thing as samadhi, except having a little bit of a wider.

A wider range to it, I suppose.

And finally, prajna again, having a bit of a much the same focus as pragna in the three higher trainings of the first level, but having a wider, wider range.

---

## PART 2
*Source: 02_Glenn Mullin - Healing through Meditation Mantra and Color The.txt*

Niranjara nila na pe tanya la nepar girci sobo vashodo Sabha Dhamma Sobo vashodo hum. So let's just start by relaxing the mind, body and mind, putting awareness on the breath. Breathe in with joy and breathe out with joy. Keep the back straight, neck incline just a little bit forward.

And then we offer the thought. I invoke the presence of enlightened masters, past, present, future of the ten directions. I invoke my dedication to truth and wisdom. And I invoke the spirit of compassion and friendship with all those traveling the way to enlightenment.

Then we invoke the four thoughts. May all beings have happiness. The cause of happiness be free from misery or suffering. The causes of misery and suffering rest in joy without limitation and find the place of equanimity for beings pleasant and unpleasant. Someone give that man a shot of whiskey.

It.

And then in terms of the extraordinary Tantric motivation, I engage in the practice of healing not just to have a longer, richer, more fabulous life for myself alone, not in that self centered way, but in order that I may be a vessel of greater good in the world and be stronger, happier, healthier, more abundant, so I can be of greater benefit to all souls, sentient beings.

It it's Om sobha vasodhua Sabha Dhamma sobha wa shodo hum. All Himalayan Buddhist meditation from Bhutan, Ladakh and Lehula Spiti, and Nepal up through Tibet and the Manchu and Mongol territories in Eastern Russia begin with these.

First we sit down, put the mind on the breath, breathe in with joy, breathe out with joy, bring the mind to a state of relaxation, peace and the body into a state of stress free presence. We follow that with invocations of the enlightenment forces from the ten directions, past, present and future.

Invocation of Dharma, which is our commitment to truth and the cultivation of wisdom, and finally to Sangha, the quality of compassionate and supportive relationships with spiritual friends.

The seventh Dalai Lama said, it's important in our life that we cultivate spiritual spiritual friends in our life. Spiritual friends give us strength and stability in our life.

Has a verse which says, wind blowing in over a sandalwood forest smells sweet and blowing in over a field of Yakshit smells bad. So if your friends are like a sandalwood forest, your lifestyle, your habits pick up sandalwood qualities.

If your friends are like Yakshit, your life takes on the smell of Yakshit. So he said, choose wisely. And of course we must put that in the context of having love, respect, empathy, compassion for all living beings.

But in our life we can only ever have a dozen or two or three dozen friends at any time. Those we let in to the inner core of our being and with whom we share many, many things. So those ones are special amongst equals and have a special impact on our lives, a deeper impact on our lives.

So choose wisely we make the thought of. I do this practice not just to benefit myself, but in order to achieve enlightenment myself more quickly, in order to be of greater benefit to others. I think this quality of known as bodhichitta, it's the strongest cure for self centeredness.

It's also one of the strongest cures for depression, loneliness and so on. When someone starts to feel depressed, essentially it's because they become somewhat overly obsessed with their own problems, with their own difficulties.

But instead, if we put the context, all living beings or beings of the world, it takes off that focus, releases that focus and makes it something bigger. A favorite practice for Central Asians. The Buddhist of Central Asia is Tanglen.

Whenever we have any difficulty, we think just like I have that difficulty. Many beings in the world have similar difficulties and through my difficulty I take on their pain, their difficulty. So we try and think of something in your own life which is a little bit difficult right now.

Like for instance, if I don't know, your car needs a new clutch or a new transmission, you have a flat tire, your house is, what is the expression? Underwater.

Whatever problems in your life, either health wise with yourself or relationship wise with family and friends, financial, all of the different areas in which humans can feel unhappy and feel under stress, under pressure, can feel depressed and try to choose one specific thing and think just like I have that many beings in the world have the same, but not only to the extent I have it, but even more than me, just like I suffer in this way, there are beings who suffer, countless beings, thousands and thousands of beings who suffer equally and suffer even more in that way.

If I have a cold, there are people with flus. If I have a flu, there are people with pneumonia.

If I have pneumonia, there's people I don't know, just hit by a truck, had a flu, had a cold that developed into a flu, then developed into pneumonia, they sneezed and stepped in front of a truck and so on. All those beings.

And as we breathe in, we breathe in a black cloud of the suffering of others and we bring it to our heart and we imagine that it strikes against our obsession with whatever is the small problem that we ourselves have.

Often when I travel as a Buddhist teacher Dharma teacher, people come to me and mention various problems in their lives, and they ask for meditations or mantras and ways to get above those problems.

And one of the most efficient ways of doing so is simply to look at the problem, put it into context of the vast, the situation with many other beings in similar and even worse ways. Then breathe in their difficulty as a black cloud, and it strikes your obsession with your own difficulty.

And breathe out happiness, breathe out a cloud of white light to those beings. Send happiness, send relief, and send healing. So let's do that for a few moments. And I think the key with it is to think with what's one problem you have in your life?

Make it something non abstract, something pertinent to you, to your actual life. It's on the basis of great compassion and the bodhicitta. We engage in whatever spiritual practice we take up, whether it's meditation, yoga, daily jogging.

The seventh Dalai Lama pointed out, whatever we do is spiritual if we engage in it with a spiritual motivation. And spiritual in the Mahayana sense means my commitment to making my life a vessel for bringing benefit to as many beings as possible.

Usually if we take in Buddhist world, if we take like practamoksha vows, precepts like don't kill, don't steal, there's like five of them. I usually only remember one or two. Good Buddha said, don't take too many because you'll get confused. I guess the most important is spiritual deceit.

Buddha may one of those. One of the five principal precepts for all Buddhists to take. Don't pretend you're spiritually greater than you are in order to deceive people and take advantage of. Of human gullibility. I think humans are always looking for a hero, a savior.

And it's very easy in the spiritual world for someone to be a charlatan type and to take a pretend they are greater than they are. And in that way, use that quality of humans of searching for greatness. Use the quality of searching for greatness as a hook of deceit.

So Buddha made that one of the five most serious things to do. Little lies are okay. Like, you know, when a young man's romancing a young girl, he'll say, oh, you're the most beautiful woman I've ever seen. Actually, she's probably only one of like the 10 most beautiful. Maybe she's number seven.

He doesn't say, you're extremely beautiful. You're almost as beautiful as Sarah and Joey. And let's see, who else. Oh, yes, there's one More that was a little more beautiful than you.

And in the morning when your wife comes down wearing hair colors and fudgy makeup, a clay mask or whatever on her face, she says, how do I look? Well, a little bit like Bozo the Clown. Thanks for asking. So when it comes to lying, in Buddhism, a spiritual deceit is the most important.

And deceiving people, in order to harm them in any way, steal their money or take advantage, get them under your control. Somehow I think there's only one politician in the States, in America who doesn't commit that fault. Donald Trump. Or is it that other guy? The guy with the wacky haircut?

Bernie. Yeah. Yeah, Bernie. So those kind of precepts we only take until our death. Not to kill humans, not to steal things of value, and so on.

But the precept, the vow, the determination to achieve enlightenment quickly in order to benefit all beings, that we take for as long as the universe exists, until our enlightenment. Of course, if we get enlightenment, next week or even this weekend would be okay.

People always ask me when I do these things at the end they say, how did the weekend retreat go? I never like to say, well, nobody got anything out of it. They sat there like a bunch of turnips. They were like ducks on which you pour water.

Nothing went through the thick outer layer of oily feathers. I prefer to say, well, three achieved complete enlightenment, five became eighth level saints, three or four achieved first level sainthood. And even the slowest, dumbest, most turnipe transformed their lives a hundred times over.

That's what I would like to say. But on occasion, one does end up with a weekend for a weekend with the people. More in the turnip class. Now, I love turnips. It's one of the main ingredients in Irish stew. So I don't say that disparagingly to those of you who are more turnip.

Like how to avoid turnip ship. A great teacher, Deepankara Srishnana, he said, when you come to an event, don't be like an upside down pot that you get dozy and sleepy and yawny and nothing sinks in. Everything just passes over your ears.

Sit alertly, joyfully and enthusiastically, like a little puppy who, who has been waiting at home for the master to come home from work. And when he opens or she opens the door, the little puppy wags its tail very excitedly and jumps up and down.

You should listen with that degree of excitement and enthusiasm and don't be like the pot with a hole in it that you hear things but like 10 minutes later just slips out the other air memory. I think it's an actual mental focus.

When we hear something, to retain it, we have to kind of burn it into the memory cells, don't we? We have to kind of press the thinking muscle in a particular way that it makes a deep stamp on our consciousness. And thirdly, the pot with yesterday's food in it.

As we listen, we don't listen with a relaxed mind, but rather we listen overly analytically and compare everything to other things we've heard at the time of listening. We should do critical thinking and comparison the day after or the evening after. But at the time, listen openly and freely.

Therefore, the process to enlightenment is sometimes said to be unlearning as much as it is learning, unlearning the bad habits of our thinking and manner of experiencing, rather than bringing those bad habits into the forest and just using whatever we get to increase our bad habits.

So sometimes I think that happens a lot, especially I think, with Western people. We tend to be a little bit, what you call, arrogant. Tibetans always say the biggest. The character flaw of Tibetans is jealousy and envy. The biggest character flaw of Westerners is arrogance. We're not especially.

We don't come from an especially humble culture. I remember the first time I met the Dalai Lama. It totally knocked my socks off, and I was coming down. And most people, I think everyone at that, almost everyone at that first meeting was completely sort of just buzzed like we had been tased.

And there's this one guy saying, well, that wasn't very exciting, was it? Reminded me of a countryside vicar.

So in that way, by keeping an open mind to when we hear any dharma discourse, whether it's Buddhist or yoga or science or anything else, often in the West, I think we see scientific studies on this subject and that subject.

One problem with them is they're often sponsored by particular companies and encouraged to find particular results. So I always read those ones rather than the totally open ones, because that way you get the information you want to hear.

Harvard Medical Journal says smoking prevents Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. Two shots of whiskey in the evening for men and one for women is very good for your heart. You can always find a medical study out there to give you what you would like to hear.

But the most valuable medical studies are those which are open, what they call pure research studies, and try to find an actual formula that is, across the board, a valet.

So in the same way, when we listen to a discourse, whether it's on science or geography or history or anything else, but especially Spiritual issues to try to open the mind, listen with an open mind and open heart, and later digest and then think critically.

Critical thought is very important in the Buddhist tradition. Before Buddha died, he said, be like an analyst buying gold, Cut, burn, test if it sounds good to you or reasonable makes sense to you. And secondly, if you take it in practice and you feel benefit, then you should accept it as valid.

Otherwise don't do so. So that critical thinking is very important, but at the time of listening, rather than thinking critically, to think organizationally how to retain it and later think critically through it.

So those three pointers are given by Atisha when he taught in Tibet and they're often mentioned at the beginning of discourses.

So this, as is said in the flyer for the event, the healing yogas of Amitayas and Hayagriva as coming through to Tibet with Ri Chungpa passed through Milarepa, Gompopa, Pama Trukpa and Jigtin Sumgan, the founder of the Drikung School. And then down through the various Dalai Lamas and Panchen Lamas.

In later times, three Amitayas healing lineages came to Tibet. This is, I think, the most popular of all of them. Otherwise, Padmasambhava also came to Tibet in about seven hundred and fifty or so and taught Amitayas lineage that is still practiced in many of the schools, especially the old schools.

Those of you who came to Tibet with me last autumn, we went to the Yemalung, the little temple where he did that retreat with many of his disciples and gave those transmissions. The Sakya Monastery, also early Sakya masters brought in a lineage through Bari Lotsoa.

It also is practiced through many schools of Central Asian Buddhism. And because Gelugba is a fusion of all the other schools, in other words, the Dalai Lama school is a fusion of other schools. Most of all other school lineages are retained within Gelugba.

But in Gelugba, the favorite is the Rechungpa Milarepa lineage. So that's the one we mostly focus on today. Now, I think everyone who knows Tibetan Buddhism and healing knows of Medicine Buddha, Medicine Buddha mantra.

So the Medicine Buddha and the Medicine Buddha Tantra is the basis of Tibetan practical medicine, if you would say, or herbal medicine or the doctor medical tradition as taught in the Menzokong, the Tibetan government medical college.

So all Tibetan doctors study the Medicine Tantra associated with Medicine Buddha. And there it said, for perfect health and well being, we need three things. First, we need. And so it's mostly a guide to how to stay healthy and also how to recover health if you go out of disbalance.

In that it said all illnesses and disbalance come from klesha, and karma come from mental distortions or spiritual distortions and karma, predispositions of energetic flow, either in this life or in previous lives. The medicine tree is shown like a tree with three roots, those being the three.

And it comes up and it flows into a tree with many flowers and leaves and branches and barks. And every part of that medicine tree is an herb or has herbal qualities or has organic qualities for healing. The bark can heal certain things, the leaves others, flowers, others, and so on and so forth.

And there they speak of 404 kinds of illnesses, 101 of which are caused by anger, irritation, alienation, that kind of mindset. Another 101 caused by attachment, clinging, craving, another 101 caused by apathy, listlessness, laziness, kind of a lack of direction, lack of directionlessness.

And the last hundred and one caused by sharks. No, ghosts, Ghosts. Not sharks, Ghosts, ghosts, spirits and so on. Like tree spirits.

Very common to get from tree spirits and nature spirits by disrespecting nature, lake spirits by polluting water and rivers, air spirits, air spirits by polluting the air and irritating the air spirits.

Then of course, there's dead Uncle George who still wanders around your house rattling chains at night. So the first three are largely cured by herbs. And the last one, disbalance with spirits, or out of harmony with spirits, is cured by means of shamanic ritual.

Therefore, in the four elements of the Buddhist teaching, one of the four elements is shamanic healing. They have all kinds of rituals for everything to do with disbalance with nature spirits or the spirit level of our world.

That said, probably only one problem in a thousand with Tibetan doctors attributed to spirit issues. The other 999 are to do with physical things. Those physical things having their root in one of those three kleshas, either from this lifetime or a previous lifetime.

As I've often quoted in the Buddhism, there's an expression, look at your body, you can see your past lives. Look at your mind, you can see your future lives. So our body is a kind of a crystallization of everything we've done and been in this lifetime, but also from previous lifetimes.

The energy riding or carrying the soul that comes into this life, that gives our life its force and direction. So in the medicine Buddha Tantra, healing in those four ways, healing those four kinds of disbalances, are there usually three approaches to healing? Are taken.

And one of those approaches is medicine, herbal medicines. And so Tibetan doctors in summertime gather many types of herbs. And all the herbs gathered at different altitudes all have different healing powers. They have to study astrology and astronomy to do that.

Because many types of herbs are at their maximum peak efficiency when particular stars come into alignment. That's how they kind of a doctor's Farmer's Almanac.

So when a particular constellation sits in a particular position compared to other, more stable stars, this will indicate the time to pick particular kinds of herbs. Most Tibetan medicines today we get are little black balls like this, hard as rocks, and you have to bang them with a hammer.

Or if you swallow them, you can, like, get them stuck in your throat and die. Almost happened to me the first time I took one. It was quite big and it got stuck. And I had to drink about 10 cups of butter tea to get it down. It just stuck right there.

So I was breathing very carefully so as not to inhale it. Otherwise, had I inhaled it, there would be no Glen Malin. I would have been reborn as one of the children of Donald Trump going up and down the elevators and escalators in casinos.

Or maybe that Hilton boy who, like on the airplane, smoked some pot in the bathroom and said to everyone when they got angry at him, I've seen all of your faces. My father's going to get you, all of you fired if you complain. But fortunately, I didn't breathe it in. I survived.

Since then, I hid the little pills. I put them in a little piece of cloth, hit them with a hammer. In Tibet, they didn't come like that. You had a little scoop. Everyone had their little medicine scoop, and you took a scoop and you put it in a little.

Usually when you got your medicine, you get a bag like this. So when you had it in the morning, you take a scoop and just chuck it in and drink down some boiled water. Average pill has between 20 and 30 different herbs and minerals in it. So they're very, very precise formulas.

And when the doctor reads your pulse and diagnosis, if he doesn't have one, which he thinks is exact for you, he'll say, come back tomorrow. And he'll take some of those pills and smash them up and add other ingredients that he thinks are more exact.

As I've mentioned in past stories, because I translated for two of the Tibetan doctors in Darmsla between about 75 and 85, on occasion, I would translate for them. I had many experiences of very amazing healings with these doctors.

One of them was a Scottish Woman who had a blood clot in her lower leg in the mid-70s. And at that time there was no real technology for taking care of that.

And in Delhi, the doctor at the British Embassy said we should just amputate immediately because if it moves up your leg, you're going to have a heart attack or stroke and be dead.

So she called an ambulance kind of taxi and lay stretched out in it and came to dharmsla and went to the Dalai Lama's doctor and he said, oh yeah, we don't need to amputate. We'll give you some medicine and it'll come out. And they were thinking, well, how will it come out?

But it started right on the inside of her thigh to just grow a bump. And it became bigger and bigger until it was like the size of half an egg. And then he'd come over every day and put a particular kind of oil on it.

And then one point he left some herbs and he said to the boyfriend, so you stay with her at all times, and one of these days it's just going to come out and when it does, put the herbs on it and, you know, have her wrap it or hold it and come running and bring me.

And one day they're sitting there and this just went, bing. Went flying across the room, broke through the muscle wall and then broke the skin. And all of the coagulated blood clot just came shooting out like a marble and flew across the floor. The hotel manager complained about the blood?

No, no, they cleaned it up. And as a result, her leg wasn't amputated and she is alive and well until today.

About five or six years ago, when I was in Atlanta, a friend of mine, artist friend of mine, who's quite well known around the world because he's done many posters and postcards that get distributed and then sold in the Buddhist world, visited me in Atlanta for a project I had.

And he said, oh, yes, Glenn, remember that girl, Ba Ba Ba? She's now my next door neighbor and she said to say hello and her leg is still okay. So their herbs and their medicines are very effective and in very amazing ways.

Especially good for cures of things that we haven't had much experience with yet in the west or aren't very good with yet in the West. Problems with immunity system, I think being principle, because we're still very in the dark about immunity system.

Mostly we use steroids and immunity system repressants like antibiotics and such. Very good with quite a few kinds of cancers and very good with the vital Vessel organs, the liver, the kidneys, pancreas, spleen, these kind of things. So one is medicines, the other is chupa.

And chupa literally means lifestyle. And it has to do with how much you walk and things like that.

Often the doctors, like, for instance, one lady who's pregnant, the doctor asked her throughout her pregnancy to walk four miles, three or four miles a day, five kilometers a day, and it's hilly in Dharmsa. When you walk, you walk up and down, so a lot of strong walking.

And the baby came out in about maybe 30 or 40 minutes. Because she had walked so well, the muscles of her pelvic floor were very, very strong. And she lay down to have the baby and suddenly flash. It actually came out in the birth sack. So it was very neat and tidy.

No like blood and guts and stuff on it. Most babies look very ugly when they're born because they get squished and all, like, slimy and coming out because the waters break. But if they come out in the sack, they come out neat and tidy.

Sort of like being born with a tuxedo and a top hat and a bowler tie. And thirdly, diet. What one eats is considered to be the first line of medicine in Tibetan medicine. So diet. Diet activity, and then medicines. Myself, once a year, I take Tibetan medicines as a preventative.

I just go to my doctor and say, hey, Doc, I'm 100% perfect, but I want to be 101. As Clint Eastwood puts it, a man needs an edge. Tibetans didn't drink coffee so often. When they give you medicines, they'll say, oh, no coffee.

So I always tell them to my doctors when I go to them, I say, I have coffee in the morning, tea in the afternoon and whiskey at night. Whatever you give me should fit that regime. Or don't bother prescribing it. I'm not taking is important with doctors. You know, doctors often have this sense.

People come to them who are sickly and you're feeling weak and kind of vulnerable. So you tend to look up to your doctor. That's a bad thing. You should understand your doctor is the same as your cook or your house cleaner or anyone else, your mechanic.

If you hire a mechanic to fix your car, there are beautiful human beings, all of whom have been mother to you in a previous life. But they do work for you in that relationship. So that system of practice. And then people who do that do the medicine Buddha practice with.

The mantra becomes a bekanze ma because it runs the Samugati soha. I've given that Initiation a few times around the world and gave it down near here in Ottawa. Was it last year or the year before?

But in terms of purely spiritual healing without any connection to the herbal ayurvedic, because Tibetan medicine, 75% comes from India, 75% is the Indian Aurya Veda, in my opinion, better than most Indian Ayurveda today. Because training in Tibet was a 12 year training.

And in India almost anyone can hang up an Ayurvedic medicine shingle and say, we're an Ayurveda school and can give an Ayurveda degree. And usually it's three to four years.

There are of course, schools that are much better and more trustworthy, but there's no strict control over that aspect of things. Like in America, for instance, you need state licensing and things like that. That's not really necessary.

And especially if Ayurvedic medicines leave India and practice abroad, if you rely on one as important to know where they were trained and how thorough was their training. Otherwise, if they have a thorough training, I think India or Yurveda is one of the great medical systems of the world.

Tibetan is about 75% Indian or Yurveda. And the other 25% being a little bit from old Tibetan medicine, a little bit from old Persian medicine, because Persian Persia was their western partner and their main trading partner for many centuries.

A little bit from Mongolia, who was India, was their main trading partner. Persia their second most important. Then Mongolia was their third most important. And finally they had some trade with China. But from the cultural capitals of Tibet to China was much more difficult.

Journey far longer and so not so much from China. The other thing was in 793 all things Chinese were banned from Tibet. That sort of put a damper on some cultural exchange. No translation of Chinese books were allowed in Tibetan and Chinese teachers weren't allowed to teach in Tibet.

They could come on pilgrimage and they could come to study, but they weren't allowed to teach. I think it was partly political because the Chinese called foreigners barbarians. And I think Tibetans thought, oh, well, that must mean they're barbarians.

And I think that's one of the reasons they made that rule. But the other rule was the king at the time, as kings are wont to do, had quite a few wives from different parts of the world.

One of them was a Chinese wife and she had brought in several monks to do rituals for her and run a little temple for her. Rumor went around that one of the monks was having an affair with the queen. That may have played a role in Chinese culture being banned from Tibet.

The system that we're doing today is purely an Indian tantric system. So it's not based on Ayurveda, but rather it's based on the far more ancient mystical healing or spiritual healing method. And it's a combination of two tantric systems.

Kriya tantra, which is the first of the four levels of tantra, and Hayagriva, often known as Anuttara tantra, Anuttara Yoga Tantra, highest yoga tantra. So it combines those two systems. In particular, it's got two stages of practice, as all tantras do. They've got two stages.

A first stage, which is mantra mandala, sort of visualization, color therapy kind of thing, where the world transforms into a mandala, and one does visualizations and mantras of the naturally perfect or perfecting quality within that world.

And the second stage in Kriya Tantra, the second stage is just kind of like Zen or Vipassana or Satyapatthana, known as Kriya Mahamudra. So second stage of the Kriya Charya tantras don't have the kundalini chakra, nadi practices, the yoga and Anuttara yoga. The top two are the other two.

The second stage, tantra, refers largely to being based on the chakra Nadi kundalini, which is similar to the Chinese tradition of qi qigong. Those kind of practices, or as they put it in Korea, qigong have a lot of similar features.

I think the kundalini and the chi or qigong are connected to a far more ancient system that really goes back 25 or 50,000 years. We find traces of it in ancient Egypt, meaning it was really Pan Asian.

We find traces of it in Eastern Russia, Siberia, in the shamanic traditions, and we even find traces of it amongst the more ancient of the North American native groups that emigrated here from Central Asia, like the Hopi, the Apache, the atlata, the various 19 Pueblo tribes.

So it's a very ancient system. So this is amitayas and Hayagriva, in the sense that the first stage, the mandala practice, is amitayas, the mantra practice is amitayas Kriya tantra. And the second stage is the kundalini practice, the chakra nadi practice.

So today and tomorrow we'll be examining those two levels. Now, hair in this system. In the first Dalai Lama's commentary, he mentions that our life span and the quality of our life are dependent upon three factors. And the first of those three factors is Le, which means karma.

And it means a kind of energetic, compulsive energy release, you could say kind of a combination of habit and momentum that we have from past behavioral patterns in this and previous lives. When we have good karma, good things happen. When we have bad karma, bad things happen.

We may be reborn as human, which is good karma, but we're born with three ears, which is extra good karma, because if someone's behind, you can hear them coming. Or with bad karma.

We're born as humans, perhaps in a good family with education and wealth, but we're reborn in a place plagued by war, violence and so on. Like America, who has had more wars in the last 25 years than most other countries on the planet put together.

Although often they don't call them wars, they'll call them squabbles with terrorists. No, born in a place in which there's always violence and murder and robbery and stuff like that. That's Chicago. Or you can be born with karma, with good throwing karma and very good completing karma.

A place like Kentucky, where are you? The ladies are southern bells, the men are gentlemen, and the drink of choice is a good single barrel bourbon.

So one is our karma, our kind of predisposition to behavior, you could say, the way the forces of life line up in the patterning that we're going to experience.

Second, punya, which literally means merit, virtue, goodness, kind of all of those quality good qualities we have going for us, the forces of good energy we have going for us. And the third is se, and se means personal vitality.

And according to this system, the qualities of our life, the richness of our life, the abundance of our life, the happiness of our life, and even the duration of our life, our lifespan is conditioned by these three factors.

So therefore it's taught in terms of each of those three has a teaching connected to it with karma.

How to increase our positive karma and weaken our negative karma with our punya, our natural goodness or native goodness, how to increase our native goodness, our strength of goodness, our dynamic creative energy force, and finally, tse.

So each of those has a sort of a system, you could say, or a menu of practices that we do that can be done. And the Amitayas Hayagriva yogas mainly focus upon the third of those, se, or personal vitality.

That's the one that we'll be spending the bulk of the weekend examining in the first Dalai Lama's commentary. He teaches them as the eight generation stage yogas and the eight completion stage yogas.

In other words, the eight meditations or contemplations that work with mandala and mantra and color therapy and the eight that work with chakra nadi Kundalini style practices.

So those 16 is what we'll be exploring and experimenting with to a large extent in terms of karma and Punya for karma, for reduction of negative karma.

Often in the Tibetan world at the beginning of Tantric practice, people will do 100,000 of the hundred syllable Vajrasattva mantra Om Vasattva Samaya manopalaya Vajrasattva Tenapatrida drido member Wasoto shaya member anuratu member Sarva Siddhi me prayatsa Sarvakarma suchya mechidam sriankoro hung ha ha ha ha ho Masaravatagada va bhava Mahasamya Sabha ahung Pa. And with each of those four, with each recitation of those mantras, doing it in four cycles, usually we put a little Vajrasattva on our head and vajrasattva just your white Bodhisattva sitting like normal, holding a bell in his lap like this.

And the Vajra like this. We sit that little Buddha Bodhisattva on the crown of our head. And as we do the mantra, from his heart comes a flow first of white energy and it fills our body.

And we think any negative karma created in this or previous lifetime by means of the body, and then we do it with red light and fills our body and any negative karma created in this and previous lives by means of speech, harsh speech, divisive speech, false lying speech, deceptive speech, or just idle gossip like talking about the super bowl, the hockey playoffs.

Oh no, that's relevant. That's important. What's Ida gossip talking about your neighbors love lives? Talking about Donald Trump or Hillary Clinton. Talking about Hillary Clinton's many crimes and misdemeanors and as Bernie Sanders put it, her emails, her damn emails.

We don't want to hear more about her damn emails. And we do with red light. And we think, whatever negative karma, through actions of speech in this or previous lives, I wash away. And finally, with blue light, any negative karma created by means of the mind.

In other words, by thoughts of anger, thoughts of jealousy or envy, thoughts of desire, attachment, longing, and just clinging to a false sense of self.

And as I mentioned earlier, in ordinary Tibetan medicine we say all illness comes from the because how our thoughts work impact how our energies move. When we're in a happy mood, we exude happy energies, don't we? When we're in an Angry mood, we exude angry energies.

When we're in a needy, craving mood, we exude needy, craving energies. And these flow through our body, and they flow through our life. And they connect with everything in the whole universe, don't they? It's what connects us in particular ways with particular things.

And in this case of negative emotions and negative energies connects us with things that bring conflict and disharmony. And from that conflict and disharmony comes disbalance. And from the disbalance comes one of the 303 types of illnesses, the other hundred and one being sharks. Oh, no, ghosts.

It's always funny translating for Western doctors, having interviews and meetings with Tibetan doctors. Well, yes, everything's kind of logical. And then they come to the 101 caused by ghosts.

But very often, when I lived in Dharmsville for About the first 10 years, one of my lamas was one of the great exorcists on the mountain. And so I would often sit in with him on those exorcisms.

It was always very amazing to see the kind of very intense transformation would happen at the end of an exorcism ritual with those kind of cases that required exorcism. Now, with Vajrasattva, there's the ordinary way to do it. From both sutra and lower Tantras, where it's just solitary.

Vajrasattva sits above the crown of our head, and the mantra comes from a moon disc, and the lights come from a moon disc at his heart. And on the top of the moon disc, the syllable hung. And surrounding the hung, the hundred syllable mantra. Om bhaja satasamaya manapaliya vasa sapa.

Dad, if you don't like to do the whole hundred syllable mantra, you can just do Om vajra satva hung peace. Maybe say it after me. 3. Om vaja satva humpe. Om benza sat for Humpe. Om vajra sat for Hungpa. Om benzo sat for humpe. Tibetans can't say the letter va v, so the vajra sattva they can't say.

And if you have an N after an open vowel in Tibetan, it makes it become sharp, like an umlet in German or the slash through a vowel in Swedish. So varshara becomes benza. And for the fourth round, all three lights simultaneously.

Because ordinarily we think body is one thing, spirit, speech and thought is another, and mind is another. We have that sense of these three as being separate entities. But in reality, all are three different dimensions of the one entity. They're always inseparable.

Anything that happens in the body also reverberates as energy, which is speech, also reverberates within the mind, which is the consciousness platform on which the theater of body and speech operate.

Similarly, anything in the mind reverberates as energy, which is the quintessential nature of speech and reverberates in the body. So with the fourth round, white, red and blue simultaneously emanate forth and simultaneously emanating.

Fourth, fill the body and purify all indivisible body, speech and mind. Negative karma collected, created or generated in this previous lives.

If we do as a highest Yoga Tantra practice, and we always emphasize the unity of male female, so we have vajrasattva sitting in sexual union with consort on the crown of our head. And from the point or the place of their sexual union, the lights flow from that very place.

In other words, we want to generate the kind of the great bliss or the great power, compassion, the somewhat sexualized energy that is consistent or pervasive in highest Yoga Tantra practice.

And as we'll see later, that energy is considered to be the most pure and sacred of all energies because it's the very most ancient of creative forces. It's the very force creating and sustaining life not only with humans, but even rabbits and, I don't know, perhaps even cockroaches.

I've never watched enough of the Animal Planet to know Animal Planet. They prefer, like tigers and jaguars and snakes. They don't have that much on cockroaches. They tried, but the viewing audience was small.

As with all meditations before and after the meditation, we should begin with the same processes of putting the mind on the breath, generating the invocation of enlightened beings past, present and future, the four immeasurable thoughts, and so on.

So once again, let's put the mind on the breath for a few moments and just breathe in with joy and breathe out with joy. Then the invocation, enlightened masters, past, present, future of the ten directions, dedication to truth and wisdom. And then the four thoughts may all have happiness.

The cause be free from suffering. The cause rest in joy without downfall, and find the mind of equanimity for beings pleasant and unpleasant. Then Om sabo ashodo sarva Dhamma, sobo vashodo hum.

We allow the world to dissolve into radiance, the radiance into my body, my body from head down and feet up into radiance, into a little red fire at the center of my chest, my heart chakra. And this from the Base up into infinite radiance and just sit in formless radiance for a few moments.

So of the two levels of practice that working with mandala, mantra, color therapy, which is in Kriya Tantra, just known as first stage Tantra, and the second stage in this being taken from Higher Griva Tantra, which is the Kundalini, certain kind of Kundalini practices directed at healing.

The first stage is taught as four ways of doing the healing, meditation. And they all work with the mantra, Om Amamarani Jeevantaya Soha. Om Amamarani Jeevantaya Soha. Om Amamarani Jeevantaya Soha. Om Amamarani Jeevantaya Soha.

The way that it's called eight yogas is because we do that in eight ways, and the eight ways are in four different categories. So each time the meditation or the visualization, whatever you want to call it, is very similar.

We start, we see ourselves, our ordinary body, but as a body of light, as though our body were pure energy or pure radiance. And above our head is Amitayas Buddha, as in this image that Jason so gracefully brought in. Today, a picture is worth a thousand words.

So Buddha said, 2,500 years after my passing, my dharma will go to the land of the red man. He's the red man. So I guess it would come to the Theosophical Society of America, because here we are.

Actually, Tibetans think of white people as red, because whenever we, like, drink whiskey or something, most white people flush and turn quite red. In the early days, they thought of themselves as the red people because the windswept heights, Tibetan cheeks, all turn quite red.

And Tibetan girls, to make themselves look sexy, put like red rouge hair. Some people think it looks sexy, other people just think it looks like red rouge.

And above our head, we put the Amitayas Buddha and his Sambhogakaya form, or Supreme Nirmanakaya can be either, meaning having the five point crown of the five Wisdoms, hands in meditation posture, legs crossed in meditation.

In his hands is a longevity vase, the vase holding the elixir of immortality. And inside of the vase with the elixir of mentality of immortality is a mandala like the one we dropped the flower and stick on last night. Round mandala, sort of like a globe, because it's really three dimensional.

You paint it flat, but it's really three dimensional, like a little fishbowl with the mandala inside, sort of as a holographic image. And at the center of that mandala sits another Amitayas, hands in meditation posture, legs crossed. And inside of that vase is another mandala.

At the center of that mandala is another Amitayas. And in his vase, another mandala. So on, as long as we like to think of it. And it's sort of, I think, showing the multidimensionality of things.

On the one hand, on the outer amitias represents the sort of healing of the coarse body, the body of flesh and bone. The one in the vase, the more subtle healing, healing of the inner life, you could say healing of our tortured soul.

And inside of that, the vase, the vase in his hands on the most secret level, which is the healing of our eternal, eternal karmic situation, our eternal situation with sense of duality, sense of separateness from the world and so forth. That's the vase that he is holding. What? Yes, yes, yes, yes.

He holds one. And inside of that is another. You know, it's a mandala with another amitias. And inside of that Amitias vase is another one. So you got like at least three dimensions of it kind of thing for outer inner secret.

And then you can go through one more for most secret, most people just do one or two. Just to get the general idea that it's multi dimensional. Syllable, red syllable. At the center is the. Each of the five Buddha families has a bija, a seed syllable.

Hri is a seed syllable of the lotus family of Amitabha and of compassion. So when we say Avlogadeshvara Mantra, Omani, Padmi Hung, because he also is lotus family, we conclude by saying O Mani Pami hung Hri. But hri is hard to. If you don't know Tibetan or Sanskrit.

If you just write H R I H in English, it doesn't look very interesting. So you can just sort of put like a, I don't know, sort of squiggly thing, a red squiggly thing, maybe like a red fire going like this, something like this. The mark of the Comanche will work.

And we should think that this amitayas and the seed sobo within it, within the vase represents my own Amitias, represents my own mind, the deeper nature of my own mind, my own consciousness, my own soul. So it's a deeper nature of who and what I am.

The red color is the great compassion and the great bliss. Always it's red in tantras associated with bliss and passion inherits the passion of the Bodhisattva to bring benefit to all living beings. And the seed syllable, having my natural healing power.

Everyone is Naturally self healing, our immunity system should heal us from all problems. Our sense of the unfoldment of the phases of our life should prevent all accidents. If we're always on top of things.

You know, the book of the first Dalai Lama has a little section before it of how to read your dreams, how to read sky omens like cloud formations, how to watch birds and their messagings to you.

And then you'll always know when sicknesses, accidents, obstacles, obstructions and negative events are on the way on the horizon. The universe is always talking to us, and we're always listening to the universe. I think in the west, we've kind of lost that sense quite a bit because of the.

Well, as an Irish Protestant, we blame the Catholics for these things. The Inquisitions and the burning of the killing of the two. Because in Europe, this kind of knowledge was held mostly by women, not by men mostly.

The Celtic wisdom was usually passed through female lineages in old Europe, in Ireland and Scotland, France and these Celtic countries, as well as other parts of Europe. So during the Inquisitions, even though they did kill a half million men, they killed over 2 million women.

And there were always people who were connected to that ancient knowledge of our ancestors. So this idea that the universe isn't just an external inert phenomena swirling about, but we are always in communication with it, and it is always in communication with us.

Birds are always talking to us, animals are always talking to us. Dreams are always talking to us. Clouds are always talking to us. So the first Dalai Lama's commentary goes into that to some extent, but I think, anyway, people have a general feeling for it, don't they? You.

You wake up some days and you think, I should just stay in bed today. Yeah. Is a falling star a good omen? I think in general, Buddhists think of it as a good omen. Yeah.

You know, actually Tibetans in India, they think of falling stars are that longevity deity, one of the Akanista deities, higher realm deities, is visiting the Earth. So he's plunging down to do a little bit of work on Earth because of course, it is a rock that's coming down.

But in the Buddhist world and in the ancient world, I think all matter supported some type of spiritual energy or spiritual force. Trees have spiritual forces, mountains have spiritual forces, lakes have spiritual forces.

So in the fourth kind of disease and healing, in the ordinary Tibetan medicine or the secular Tibetan medicine, it's really talking about being out of touch with the spirit of the mountain, the spirit of your trees, the spirit of your flower garden, spirit of rivers and sky.

And so forth, having a kind of a disrespect for them. So this amitayas representing the deeper nature of our own consciousness. In Tantra we say mind and body exist simultaneous on three levels. The coarse level is this ordinary body of flesh, blood and bone which we get from our ancestors.

And it's powered by 72,000 male and 72,000 female genetic factors, or 144,000 genetic factors. Each of these genetic factors is signaling us at all the time. And the inner is based on those. And arising from that flesh and bone, we get a particular level of coarse consciousness.

Then inside of this body, we have the 72,000 male and female drops or chemical factors or genetic factors. And when these are in harmony, this gives rise to a sort of subtle level of consciousness. So that's the Vajra body and the Vajra mind, the subtle body and subtle mind.

When we can completely still those two dimensions through meditation and yoga, then we come to the third level. And the third level is the extremely subtle, which is just the soul and the imprints of karmic memory that travel with the soul or support the soul.

So in Tibetan, Shinto trame, lungtung, Shinto trame sa, the most subtle energies and the most subtle consciousness.

The most subtle consciousness there is clear light consciousness, the Mother clear light consciousness, which is our eternal spirit, our eternal quality of soul, which is equal to the soul quality of consciousness of a Buddha, past, present or future.

It's a universal mind you call, say called Mother Clear Light because it supports all of our experience. The subtle consciousness and the most subtle consciousness and the course consciousness all come based on this clear light consciousness.

The subtle energy supports the the most subtle energy supports the subtle energy, supports the course energy. These three are like three sheets or three dimensions of our being that are present at all times. So this amitias represents our Mother clearlight mind.

The energy radiating from it represents the eternal energies, universal energy that is of one taste or one inseparable from consciousness. Consciousness and that are inseparable, so these are known as the two inseparable undying drops.

Drop of clear light mind, primordial mind, and drop of primordial universal energy. And when we do it as a meditation session, we start with just mind on the breath, and then we do those thoughts of Buddha, Dharma, Sangha or enlightened masters.

Past, present, future of 10 directions, Dharma, commitment to truth and wisdom, Sangha, thankfulness for the support of the spiritual traditions of the world as a whole, and advanced practitioners and teachers within that tradition.

So not just Buddhist Traditions, but all the traditions that contribute to the happiness, well being, light, radiance, and so forth of the world. Then the four happiness for all, freedom from suffering for all, joy for all, equanimity for all. Then dissolve the world into light.

Sit in radiance, Dharmakaya mind, for 10, 15 minutes or 5 minutes or 1 minute, depending on your time frame. Out of that emptiness, come with your body as a kind of a pure energy body, pure light, pure radiance. Amitayas on your head. In his hands a vase. In this vase, a mandala.

As with the mandala paintings of the mandala that we used last night. At the center of the mandala, amitayas in his hands a vase. And at the center of that vase, the sil bochri, like a little red flame. And from the flame goes out lights and fills the universe.

First they fill our body and they stream out through our pores of our body. And they fill the whole universe. And going into the universe, they connect with the forces of life and pull those forces back. The forces of light then come back into the vase. The vase overflows.

The overflow comes into our body via the crown aperture, fills our body and performs the healing. And as I said, we do in four levels. The first level is pulling back what has been lost or stolen, what has been lost or stolen.

And this is by negative exchanges with others, by negative exchanges with any other living being. And the idea there is, whenever we have an unhappy encounter with others, it can lead to a kind of spiritual scarring or psychic scarring that can leave us weakened and vulnerable.

And that weakeness and vulnerability can be a doorway or an entrance way for disease, malfunction, disaster. It can be something that creates ordinary disease. It can create poverty in our life, make us inefficient in our work and in our life, in our spirit, social life.

We can have bad relationships with others because of that emotional scarring and so forth. It can affect all the various levels of our life.

We can be less loving, less compassionate because of it, have suffer from the sickness of little compassion and little lovingness, which in Buddhism we think of as a great sickness. And so any life force that has been lost through negative encounters, we send out the light and it fills the universe.

And it's a kind of a radiant, transparent light, like the light of the rising sun. And if there are specific incidents, we like to think of, like women often think of their exes, guys often think of, I don't know, the time they went fishing and a shark scared the spazzas out of them.

As for exes, guys think all my exes live in Texas. That's why I live in Memphis, Tennessee. And as we do this, we do the mantra Omarani jeevantaye soha. Tibetans can't say jeevantaye, so they say zintaye, Omamarani, zintaye soha. I kind of prefer zintaye to jeevantaye.

And the meaning of the mantra om is a naturally pure nature of all things physical, emotional and spiritual, or of body, speech and mind. Amarani is my life force, my healing force, my healing power. Something like that. Jivantaya. Zintaya has a meaning of victory.

Prevail, increase, restore, rejuvenate. Ye is a pause. You're not supposed to say ye, you're just supposed to leave an empty sound. Omarani jivanta soha. But Tibetans always say ye because they don't know that ye in Sanskrit means shut up but don't say anything. Excuse me, what did it mean?

Jeevantayu. It has the meaning of restore, rejuvenate, prevail, succeed, victory, all of those kind of meanings. And svaha. Tibetans can't say svaha because there's no letter V in the Tibetan Alphabet. So they say soha Omarani jivantaye, zintaye soha.

Or in modern Sanskrit, omamarani jeevantaye svaha. But I like zintaye soha. So let's try that for a few moments. We send out lights. Omarani zintaye soha. Sort of light of the rising sun goes out from the vase in the head, in the hands of Amitayas on our head and fills the universe.

And filling the universe finds all of those energies and life forces lost by negative exchanges with others from gods, ghosts, humans, animals and so forth. Sometimes we think like if a dog bit you or a bat attacked you. I mention that because Stephanie mentioned she was attacked by a bat once.

It didn't bite me or. But it scared the spazzoozas out of her.

Anyway, whatever negative experience and it fills the whole universe and whatever life force has been lost or damaged through those negative encounters, pulls back, fills the vase with radiant sunrise energy that overflows and fills our body and completely heals body, emotion, intellect, mind, spirit, spirit, soul heals on all those multi dimensional levels.

Oh mama rani Zintai. Yes. Oh Hamamurani is in Thai. Yes. Oh Mamarani is in Thai. Yes. Oh, Mamarani is in Thai. Yes. Oh, Mamara is in Thai. Yes. Oh, Omarani is In thay yes. Oh. Oh. Mamran is in thay. Yes. Omamarani is in thay. Yes. Oh, Omarani is in Thayas. Oha. Humamran is in Thayas.

Omamarani Zinta yes. Oha. Omarani Zinta Yes. Omamarani Omarani Zinta Yes. Oha. Omarani Zintaya soh. Oh, Mamarani Zintaya soha.

When we finish doing the mantra cycle, we should just rest with a sense of body and mind being completely healed and completely rejuvenated and restored, restored on that level.

And that it always says in the Tibetan text that we have achieved or attained the wisdom of immortality, the undying wisdom. Omarani jinta yes. Oh, Hamamrandi jintai. Yes. Oh.

So the first of the four levels of healing just happens with that very simple visualization and meditation, each of the other three. And the second is the healing of the four elements. Sometimes a fifth space is added and the third has got six little bits in it and the fourth has only one.

We'll do those during next session. Good morning, John. He's our maintenance man, so if any of you are feeling sleepy, he can maintain you. Anyone? Any like broken bones? Oh, are all your cars okay? You need your tires changed a tune up.

So in that way, by means of this, if we were to do it in retreat, we would do that for a couple of days just on that one. We just stick to the one process for two, three days until we felt totally healed, rejuvenated and restored in that way.

I think this level of practice, when we do it an extended period of time as we go into our mind and into our thoughts throughout this life, those kind of negative encounters which left us feeling weaker, left us feeling scarred, left us with less happiness, less joie de vivre, less joyfulness.

I think finding those in your life or noticing them, unlocking them, is very important part of the key to self healing and to release and to getting above getting away from that. So I think forgiveness is a part of that. And it's also in those exchanges.

I think sometimes if they happened in one's lifetime before one was a very wise person, one may have reacted negatively and harmed that person back, rather than view the exchange with some sort of sympathy or some sort of understanding.

Because even though people do harsh things, I think everyone, as the saying goes, does the best they have with the level of wisdom or intelligence they have and their karmic level at that time. We tend to always place the blame on others.

But in all exchanges, just as it Takes two to tango, so it takes two to rock and roll and two to do the swing dance. Only I think modern, like disco, you can do by yourself. So to understand that any negative experience happens is not just the other person's fault. There is some karmic connection.

Even if it's a random act of violence on a strange street at night or an attack out of the dark, you don't see the connection. There's still some sort of energetic or karmic connection, still some way in which you let your guard down or you let yourself become vulnerable.

If we look more deeply at things. For instance, I have a friend in Atlanta who bought a house in a, what you call developing neighborhood. And then it was robbed five or six times. So first he bought it and basically it had no defense mechanism whatsoever.

So then he put bars on half the windows, but he left half without bars. So then I got robbed again. So then he put bars on the windows, but he didn't put on proper doors, so he put on a proper back door. So then they broke in the front door.

So then he put something on the front door and then they broke in the front door. So then he put up signs, camera, security system. Then it was never attacked again.

And although we always feel like the other person is at the wrong, really it was just his neighbors trying to encourage him to create a home that was safe and secure and, well, fun fortified. In the early days when I used to travel in Pakistan because Dharmsala is very close to the Pakistani border.

In fact, Dharmsala, Himachal Pradesh, used to belong to the Punjab. And the Punjab used to go all the way from Chandigarh all the way up pretty well to Peshawar. I mean, three quarters of Pakistan or half of Pakistan was Indian Punjab.

Dharmsla used to belong to Lahore, the capital, the Dogra, the Dogra or the King of Lahore. And whenever I go up to Udiana to the Swat Valley, you'd always have to rent a gun when you're up there.

If you went out tenting or horse riding, because not carrying a gun was considered an insult to the local up there. They call them the tribal. The tribals. So every man is expected to be self defending.

And if you're not self defending as an insult of the local culture, like in that Clint Eastwood movie, the Unforgiven, he comes into the bar and he says, okay, who owns this shithole? Me. Me. Huh? Boom. You just shot an unarmed man. Well, he should have armed himself.

But we are responsible for our own well being, aren't we? What we eat contributes to our health. If we eat badly, it's our fault, isn't it? We are responsible for being aware of where we're walking, when we're walking on the streets. If we're not aware, we make ourselves more vulnerable.

Our home should be something which is reasonably secure. Otherwise it's so in the Buddhist world, we think if someone punches you in the nose, you should apologize to them for having a nose which is karmically punchable.

They wouldn't punch you in the nose if you did not have a karmically punchable nose. Had you done your Vajrasattva mantras the night before properly, the karmically punchability, the karmic punchability of your nose would have been dissolved.

I mean, that's usually said in humor, but there is also with an element of truth in it that to understand all of our experiences with others sympathetically, that we also contribute to whatever happens in our life just by being there. It's our karma to be there. And therefore we have that.

That sort of unconscious or energetic level of things to sort through. So I think there's. That part of the. Forgiveness is important with this first level of the healing.

Learning to forgive all of those who have harmed you in any way and also learning to forgive yourself for ways in which you have harmed others. Because we also harm others throughout our life in various little ways.

Even if it's a harsh word you say to someone, sometimes you can say a harsh word to someone and they don't notice anything. They're just not listening. Other times they're very vulnerable and a harsh word will be very crushing.

Even sometimes saying something in jest to someone when they're very vulnerable can be overwhelmingly harsh for them. So just to forgive oneself when one has created negative energies with others and to forgive others when they have created. So this is put us the first.

Because without that kind of healing, the healing power of forgiveness, I think the other healings will always be weak. Until you can forgive others and forgive yourself whatever crimes and misdemeanors, misdemeanors have gone between you.

The other healing energy practices, whether it's with mantra and visualization or whether it's the kundalini level of energy, they will remain weak as long as that isn't made solid.

---

## PART 3
*Source: 03_Glenn Mullin - Healing through Meditation Mantra and Color Thera.txt*

Foreign. Let's start by just putting the mind on the breath. Breathe in with joy, breathe out with joy. Then invoking the presence of enlightened masters, past, present and future of the ten directions to come into this room, right here, right now.

Invoking the dedication to truth and wisdom, increasing the depth of one's understanding of truth and the strength of one's wisdom. And then, thirdly, gratefulness for the circle of spiritual friends and advanced practices, practitioners alive and on the planet and in one's life.

Then the four thoughts. May all beings have happiness in the cause causes. May all beings be free from suffering the causes of suffering. May all beings have joy, which is free from downfall or limitations.

And may all beings learn to rest in equanimity, with equality, empathy for both pleasant and unpleasant beings. Om sobo vashodo Sarva Dhamma sobo vashodo hum. The outer world dissolves into light. This light dissolves into my own body.

My own body, just as at the time of death, dissolves from head down and feet up. The energies absorb into the heart and into the flame at the heart. And the flame at the heart dissolves from base up to the tip and dissolves into infinite radiance. And we just sit in radiance for a moment or two.

And then I come out of emptiness, my body looking kind of ordinary, but made of pure light energy, like a holographic image above my head, Amitayas Buddha. In his hands, the vase of wisdom, the nectar of immortality. And at the center of that vase, the mandala of complete mandala of Amitayas.

The center of the mandala, another little Amitayas. And in his hands, a vase. Send her the vase, a red flame. In nature. And in nature, my own mind, my own healing power, my own natural quality of immortal wisdom, wisdom of immortality. And from that, lights go out.

And we're going to do five series of lights. This is the healing of the. It's called the jingwa, the four elements. But we do an added one at the end, which isn't counted, which is space. And first we do yellow for the element of earth, golden color.

And the golden color goes out and fills the universe and enters into communication with all of the healing Buddhas and bodhisattvas, forces of healing, sources of health, sources of strength. And then comes back and bringing back with it the essence of the earth element.

And the essence of the earth element here comes in the form of great mountains like the Himalayas, the Andes, the Rockies, let's see, Pakistan, the Hindu Kush. And what do you have in Mexico. All the lot of mountains in Mexico. Yeah.

So pull back all of the essence of all the element earth, including all the great mountains and mountain ranges and all the rocks and boulders, all the comets and meteors, all of the planets of the. Of the universe, and these all fall into the vase.

Even though they're enormous and the vase is kind of small, they just all pour into the vase. And according to Indian mythology, Buddhist mythology, the world is destroyed four times. Human civilization is destroyed four times. The first time is by a great earthquake.

So even the great earthquake that destroys civilization at the end of an era is drawn into the vase. All the great earthquakes that have ever occurred are drawn into the vase, and they melt into wisdom elixirs. And the elixir of immortality overflows from the vase.

And the overflow enters my body via my Brahma aperture, fills my body with golden light. And within my body, all of the earth element on a course level, then my bones and all of the solid solids, like the bones and teeth and all of those fingernails.

Toenails, if you have, like, toenail fungus, it's healed. Ingrown toenails, healed. Within each cell, the fiber in each cell or the solid quality of each cell is completely healed. And one becomes completely infused with the wisdom of immortality or awareness of one's immortality.

Omarani jeevantaya Tsintaya soha. Omarani zintaya soha, Om Amamarani. So we'll do about 21 mantras. Okay. Omarani zintaya somarani. Zintaya soha. Om Amaraniya. So Amamran is in Thayer. So Omamoran is in Thayas. Omamoran is in Thay. Yes. Omamoran is in Thayas. Omamoran is in Thaya Soha.

Omamuran is in Thaya Soha. Omamuran is in Thaya. Omamuran is in Thaya Soha. Omaran is in Taya. Soha is in Taya Soha. Omaran is in Taya. Somaran is in Taya Soha. Ram is in Taya. So.

And at the conclusion of the recitation, just to have a sense of one's body as being completely healed, and in particular, the earth element within the body and within each individual cell. And secondly, for the water element, white and the color of milk.

So we turn to the Amitias above our head, in his hands, a vase filled with nectar of immortality. And in the center of the vase, a complete mandala.

At the center of the mandala, a tiny Amitayas and in his vase, the syllable Ri, but just appearing as a red flame, fiery flame, and sends out lights and completely fills the universe with red ruby colored lights, filling the universe, enters into communion with all of the healing Buddhas, bodhisattvas, longevity deities, healing deities, and so forth.

And then comes back and bringing with it the element of the water, the essence of the water element. And thus pulling in all the great oceans, great lakes, great rivers, great streams. And the second great destruction of human civilization comes with a great flood.

And all the floods that occur everywhere, all of these flow into the vase. I think last year America had some floods down in Kansas or something, Indiana, Oklahoma, Bangladesh is always having floods. So all those floods come into our longevity for us.

And the milk like color of white and overflows, overflow, enters our body via the crown aperture, completely fills our body and heals the water element on a coarse level than our blood and lymph system and circulatory system and so on.

Within each individual cell, the moisture content of that cell, and we become completely infused with the wisdom of immortality. Our water element is totally healed and infused with the wisdom of immortality. And thirdly, the element of fire.

We turn the attention to the Amitayas on our head and the vase in his hands at the scent, the vase filled with the nectar of immortality. And inside of that, the complete mandala of amitayas. At the center of that mandala, a tiny Amitayas in his hands, a vase of immortality.

At its center, a little fire representing the Mantraxol Barhi, red in color, sends out ruby red light, fills the vase, overflows and totally flows out into the ten directions, completely fills the space.

All the Buddhas and bodhisattvas, their healing powers, as well as all the worldly deities associated with healing and healing power. The goddesses of healing, if you don't know what are goddesses of healing, on the painting on the left, this is a healing painting.

And this white Tara, the healing Tara on top, and the goddesses of healing are all dancing down below. Usually they're shown more naked than that, but she put skirts on them. She put them topless, but not bottomless. Because I think she knew I'd be traveling in Chicago in winter.

She didn't want them getting too cold. And Phil. So coming back brings back all of the fire element from all directions, including all suns.

And all the stars come flying into the vase from the complete universe, until the essence of all suns and stars in the whole universe are brought into the vase. And on the face of Planet, forest fires, fires in hearths, in people's homes, and all of the fires that occur.

And the third great destruction of human civilization comes with a fiery conflagration. So even the fire that destroys civilization at the end of an era, the great firestorm comes into the vase, transforms into the nectar of immortality.

The healing nectars overflows from the vase and comes down into our body by our crown aperture, fills us with ruby red light, and inside of our body completely heals the fire element within our coarse body.

Then this means the digestive system and the thing that takes our nutrients and causes them to burn. Digestive system. And within each individual cell, then the metabolism of that cell is completely healed. And we do the mantra with that visualization, Oma Mr. Omarane jeevantaya soha.

Then we just rest for a moment and feel the red radiance, ruby red radiance for very bright, completely filling our body, performing that healing function. And then our mind and our body and our emotions become completely infused with the power of the wisdom, power of immortality.

Then the fourth one, the air element, emerald green. And we turn our attention to our body of pure radiance. And above our head, Amitayas Buddha. In his hands, the vase of immortality. With nectars of immortality inside that vase, the complete mandala of Amitayas.

At the center of the mandala, a tiny Amitayas the size of a sesame seed. In his hands, a vase.

At the center of that vase, a little flame in nature, the syllable ri, and sends out emerald green lights, completely fills the vase and overflows and shines out into all 10 directions and brings back the essence of the air element. This comes in the form of great hurricanes, tornadoes, windstorms.

And the fourth destruction of human civilization comes with a great windstorm that knocks down little piggy's straw house. Even the great windstorm that comes at the end of an era. And all of this comes into the vase and it overflows.

And the overflow enters my body like a falling river and completely fills my body with a rich green luster. And within the body completely heals the air element, which means a respiratory system and also the energy signaling system.

Within each cell heals that motility aspect of the cell, the oxidization process and the way in which the motility both brings all nutrient to its desired place and also then blows away the dust residue, carries away the dust residue.

So the external body is healed and each individual cell is healed. And my body and my emotions and my mind become completely infused with the green radiance of the wisdom of immortality.

Omarani Jeevantayes ohamamamrani Jeevantayes oahumamarani Jeevantayes oahumamarani jeevantay O mama rani jeevan thayas. Okay, Omamarani Jivantaye Soha. And for the last in this series is the element of Space.

We put our mind on our body, in essence pure light and Amitias above our head, vase of immortality in his hands. At the center of that vase, a complete mandala of Amitayas. At the center of mandala, tiny Amitias the size of a sesame seed. Inside his hands, a vase of immortality.

At its center, the little fire in nature, the silver, and it sends out a blue light. The nature of sky and the nature of space and completely fills all of the universe. And it does. And as it comes back, it brings with the space quality of balance and harmony.

The qualities of balance and harmony that space brings to the four elements comes into the vase, overflows and completely fills our body and within our body. Although the four elements have been healed.

Now the balancing of these four in the coarse body and within each individual cell, the balancing of the functions of the four elements. And one Tibetan medicine text says the four elements of the body are like snakes in a barrel fighting for dominance. When one snake gets stronger, illness strikes.

When earth is too strong over the other three, fire is too strong, air is too strong. Then the body goes out of balance and the door to illness and malfunction is opened. So space balances the elements in that way, so the four elements remain strong but in perfect balance.

Omamarani Jintaya Soha Humamarani Jintaya Soha Omarani Zintaya Soha Omarani Zen Soha Omaran is in Thaya, so Omran is in. So in this way we should rest within the body now and have a feeling of the physical side of things has been completely balanced and retuned.

Just like we've taken the little Hyundai of our body into the fix it shop and we've come out with a roaring BMW. So that second level of the practice of the of the eight generation stage yogas is the healing of the four elements. Space isn't counted, so it becomes four, plus one becomes five.

Some texts also associate these if they link them to highest Yoga Tantra, the five colors which were on the Longevity arrow yesterday when we touched the Longevity arrow, it's for the healing of the five elements, the four elements plus space.

And some link this to highest Yoga Tantra in Which case it also talks about the healing of the five Skandhas and the five Kleshes, the transformation of the five Skandhas into five Buddhas, and the transformation of the five Kleshas or five delusions into five wisdom factors.

Some texts mention that. I don't think it's especially relevant because I think the generation stage is really borrowed from Kriya Tantra, where that discussion of five Buddhas isn't a big topic.

So to do so, you're bringing it down from Hayagriva Tantra, one of the eight completion stage yogas, works on the basis of the vase breathing exercise. And those of you who have done six yogas of Naropa and six yogas of Niguma, practice with me will be familiar with that.

Where we breathe, all breathing happens through the nose. You breathe in deeply, press the air down to the base of the spine, pull up the muscles of the pelvic floor, form the tummy into a pot, the belly of a pot, like on these sort of that pot of the glass pot, and you hold it there.

And those of you who have had heart operations or have high blood pressure or where pacemakers don't hold too high or too long, unless you've written a will and left me as one of the recipients, in which case hold your breath as long as you wish.

In fact, more, more, push the envelope, reach your personal best. And then we put, we do five breaths.

We put white varochana in the crown chakra, red varoshana in throat, sorry, white amitayas in crown chakra, red varoshana throat chakra, blue varochana, heart chakra, yellow varochana, navel chakra, and green varochana, root chakra or base chakra.

These vairochanas, these amitayases, are male, female in union, because the highest yoga tantra here, we're borrowing the practice from the system. So they're male, female in union.

And as you take the breath, you do five breaths and you start with the heart and then go to throat, then go to crown, then go to navel chakra, and then go to secret chakra. And as you hold the breath and press, you quietly, silently do the mantra Oma Mr. In your mind.

And from the place of union of those amitiases, an according colored light goes out and completely fills your body and then goes out through your pores just a little bit and forms an invisible force field around your body.

So we start with the blue at the heart, we take the breath, press down and pull up form the vase Breath. We're holding the vase breath towards the navel chakra. But then we turn the attention to the heart chakra, the blue amitayas in union. And then we recite the mantra silently in our mind.

Can you hear me? Don't laugh when you're holding your breath. Can you hear me? Silently reciting the mantra. And then blue light goes out from the place, from the point of union, completely fills our body, a sort of a lapis lucilli dark, lapis lusuli light.

And then goes out through the pores and forms a force field, a protective force field or force shield. And then we slowly let out the breath. And as we let out the breath, the force field gets more and more energized, more and more powerful, more and more strong.

And we can do one, three, or seven breaths like that, either. One vase breath, three vase breaths, seven vase breaths. Then move up to the throat chakra. And we take the vase breath.

And we press the energy down and pull up from the muscles of the pelvic floor, holding the air at the base of the spine, and turn the mind to the red Amitias and consortium at the throat chakra, the point of their union, their sexual union, silently reciting the mantra. Did you hear me?

Send out a red light. Red lights, ruby red lights. And completely fill my body, flow out through my pores and go out and form a shield outside of the blue.

And we again take another breath, press it down and pull up with the pelvic floor, turn the mind to the white amitayas in the crown chakra and union, and turn the mind to the place of union.

Silently reciting the mantra sends out white radiance the color of moonlight or milk, fresh milk completely fills my body, then flows out through my pores and forms a force field outside of the red.

And take another deep breath and form the vase at the base of the spine, pressing down, pulling up, turn the attention to the yellow amitias in the navel chakra, in union with consort, turning attention to the place of their union, silently recite the mantra.

And golden lights flow out, fill my body and completely heal, then flow out through the pores and form a force field outside of the white.

Then once more, we take a deep breath, press down with the abdomen, pull up with the muscles of the pelvic floor, and form the belly of the vase, pressing it into the base of the spine, toward the base of the spine.

Then turn our attention to the green amitayas in union with consort at the secret chakra, turning attention to the place of their union and silently reciting the mantra.

Green light flows out and completely fills the body and totally heals in every way, and then flows out through the pores of our body and form a fifth force field or a fifth shield outside of the yellow.

Then we can, together we can just write Saitamantra as we sort of envision our body being completely protected by these five layers of radiance, armor, Soha, Omorani, Zintaya, Soha.

And in terms of the five elements, when we did the elemental healing, the crown chakra is with water, the throat chakra is red for the air, the blue chakra, heart for space, yellow chakra, earth and navel chakra, yellow for earth, and secret chakra for air or energy.

And each of these is associated or has the nature of one of the five Buddha families. Varochana at the crown, Amitayas at the throat, Akshobhya at the heart, Ratna Sambhava at the navel, and Moga Siddhi at the secret chakra.

Each of them has the nature of the transformation of one of the five Kleshas into the five Wisdoms. Because it's a completion stage Tantra. It's fully valid to link the five to the five Buddha families because that's highest Yoga Tantra.

So it said, if we do this, even if someone attacks us with a sword, the sword will bang off of our head and won't, won't hurt at all. And even if someone should get through, the first Dalai Lama writes, and they cut off our head, we can pick it up and put it back on and walk away.

That may be an exaggeration, but if you don't see something strongly, people don't remember it. So they think, well, if it does even half of that, it's pretty good. So traditionally people do that when they're working in dangerous environments.

Like anytime I go to a hospital to visit someone, I never go to a hospital for my own illnesses because I don't get sick. But if anyone's sick and I visit them in hospital, I do this for about an hour before I go in. If someone, you know you're going to visit someone, they say, I've got a bad cold.

And if they're from Russia or one of the Slavic countries, they all want to kiss you all the time. So then you do this before you kiss someone with a cold or the flu.

I remember when Khrushchev visited the states in like 63 or something, or 62, and he kissed the Russian ambassador, who was a guy he Said, oh my goodness, the president of Russia is gay. Do you think he was? Anyway, I hope he did his Amitayas mantra beforehand just in case he had the flu.

That's one way. It's called the donning the tantric armor. The other way is from each of the five chakras you can emanate a mantra, which is the mantra of one of the five Buddha families. Otherwise you can just do the omahung.

So ha for the five simple mantras and they go out one by one and plug the pores. So no illness, negative force, disease, God, ghost, evil God or angry ghost, curses of voodoo masters, etc. Can get through. So that's one.

The Five Elements is from the generation stage and this is the way it's done as completion stage practice. So does anyone have anything they want to discuss or bring up or talk about? What? Well, let's take your question at the back. Your hand was up first, so that's fast.

Had a question about for people who follow other traditions or have a different religious background. I had a question about people who have a different religious background. Would you recommend going with the Tibetan deities or with something that works within that system?

Well, the Tibetan tradition comes directly from India, so it's basically the Indian Buddhist system of Hindayana, Mahayana, Bhajrayana combined. Lama Yesei used to teach a Shenrezi meditation, compassion meditation, where he replaced Shenrezi with an image of Christ.

And I don't think there's any fault in that. Thank you. As a writer, as someone who's written five books on Buddhist art, I kind of like the Buddhist deities to look traditional, but that's not really an important aspect of things.

And they're always changing which how they're visualized and how they're seen. For instance, Shanrazi was always male in India, Avalokiteshvara. And when he went to. When the practice became popular in China, one of the Tang princesses was.

So her father tried to marry her off to a prince for usual kind of political reasons, and she refused. So he exiled her to an island, Putow Island. So she went there and basically took continued Chenrezy practice and achieved enlightenment.

And from that time on in China, Avalokiteshvara went from being a male deity, looking pretty much like the Indian male deity, to looking like a Chinese princess. So she went from being male to being female. She became the new symbol of that practice.

And from that time on in China, if you say Kuan Yin, everyone thinks the female deity. So in that way, the Indian form of shienre zi became signified. And also in China they had a very powerful popular and powerful traditional practice, the goddess of the heavens, one of the Taoist practices.

And so she sort of took on many of those characteristics. And I think in terms of the outer look of things, it doesn't matter much. But I mean, Amy Tyas looks pretty much like an ordinary human guy, except being a little bit red.

Just imagine that it was like a Chicago person in the middle of winter who went to a nudist beach in Acapulco for a week and came back tanned on both sides. Or those ladies who go to like those tanning salons and they don't like to have like the brassiere and the bikini non tan look.

So they go in and just sort of roll over like a chicken on a skew. So Amitias is just a little bit like a well tanned Chicago in terms of the hat or the crown. I'm not sure when that became popular.

Perhaps it was with the Pala period when Buddhism became very popular in the Bengal area, what's today known as Bangladesh or East Pakistan. Before that, the Indian look was a little bit different. The hat's a little more simple.

And in Korea they gave the Buddhas and bodhisattvas this kind of cute, almost like lotus flower hat with three lotus petals, I think for the three kayas.

And if you know artists, with most artists, their Buddhists and bodhisattvas end up looking a little bit like them or with men artists, the females look like their girlfriends. So the most famous statue maker in mongolia was late 1600s, early, late 1600s, early 1700s.

And he made many sets of Taras and he had a lady friend. Nobody's sure if it was. He was supposed to be a celibate monk, but people are doubtful because he had this very beautiful lady friend that he always traveled with and was his model for all of these Tara statues.

So many people say his Buddhist statues are the most beautiful in Buddhist history because she was a model, was very good looking. You know, Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa.

You know, the painting is kind of famous for the background, but I think it's more famous because she's not a very good looking lady. Like on a, like on a scale of 1 to 10.

By your standards.

Don't speak for like my high standards, by my high standards, but the painting's quite nice. Oh, so you have a question or you're walking around with a cup of tea and a microphone.

Multitasking, right? You have a question?

Correct.

So then like, at what stage did they start adding the luminous orb? I mean, which culture is most known for doing that?

I'm not sure. I'm not sure if it can be identified because we don't have paintings from very ancient times other than the. I think the most ancient are the Buddhist paintings in Ellora Ajanta, that period which is generally thought to be about 4th century. And they're already there then.

And we don't have Buddhist statuary that we found from before that period. So. And we don't have writings.

I mean, we have writings which say, you know, when Buddha after his enlightenment came back, his five buddies who had been practicing with him and were irritated that he dropped out of their practice regime and took what's called the Middle Way and they were going to like snub him.

But when he walked up, his radiance was so strong and his halos so radiant. So that's set in the lifetime of Buddha. But artistically I'm not sure if we can really document, in a way, the study of Buddhist art is kind of new because in Asia they never had an art history kind of study.

It wasn't a tradition then. In the west, we wanted to secularize the arts, have people who knew nothing about art or know talents as an artist. But they liked hobnobbing with artists. So they study art history and become experts in art.

Even though they couldn't draw a circle or make a nose on, they looked like Picassos. The noses would all be crooked and the ears flop sided and stuff. So they'd study art history and try to sound like artists.

And then of course, they'd even have more power than the artists in some way because they could like say, this artist is very good because you can tell by the way the gesture of his hand. Yeah. So I don't think there's no real Buddhist art history. From the Buddhist side.

It wasn't a science that was commonly pursued or an academic endeavor commonly pursued. And so it really sort of developed as a Western look at Asian culture. And there I would say I don't agree with much of it.

For instance, in Tibetan and Mongolian and Chinese worlds, Nepal worlds, they claim to have statues of the Buddha that were made during the Buddha's lifetime. But no Western art historian will agree. They'll say, oh, nonsense, nonsense, there's no such thing.

The first Buddhist statuary came with the Gandhara period, second, first, second, third centuries, that sort of thing. So, you know, four or 500 years later. But from The Buddhist side, we say, absolutely nonsense. We've got these four or five statues. One is in Eastern Russia.

It came from India and then came onto the Silk Road. And when Kublai Khan became emperor and he was Buddhist, so he wanted a bunch of the best stuff brought to Beijing. And so he had that brought to Beijing. They didn't call it Beijing at the time, Khanbilik, and had it put in his temple.

And then the Mongol dynasty fell, and then came the Mings, who were half Mongols, and then came the Manchus, who were also Mongols. And then the Han barbarians tried to overthrow the Manchu civilizers, and civil war broke out.

So a group of very brave Buryat Mongols put together a SWAT team and sent it down to Beijing and stole that stone statue and brought it back to Buryat for safekeeping.

I was recently, when I was just recently in Kathmandu in October, a very dear old friend of mine, who I hadn't seen for some years, is a French academic, and his grandfather was a mercenary in the armies at the time that were hired by the various revolutionary groups around Beijing at the time.

His grandfather was the head of the mercenary force that burned down the temple in which that statue had been kept. He confessed to me, if this wasn't being webcast, I would say his name. But he swore me to secrecy.

He said, so I guess I must have some negative karma on account of my grandfather doing that. I said, no, not at all. Because of that, you know, it brought about. Inspired the Buryats to go down and save that wonderful piece and bring it back up to Buryat where it's been protected ever since.

Had it stayed in China with the lunatic Chairman Mao, you know, these Cultural revolution, destroying the four old that probably would have been destroyed. So, in fact, his grandfather, without realizing it, was probably an emanation of a Buddha or a Bodhisattva sent to protect that statue.

Wait for the microphone.

Am I coming across? Yeah, I am coming across the mic. Okay. Something you talked about this morning. I wanted to get a clarification and then a question. We were talking about the three lights, the three energies, the course, the subtle and the clear.

Oh, yeah, yeah.

And first off, if you could just quickly reiterate what we were talking about there. Are we talking about just a light, just an energy? Are we talking about our physical being? Being? Course.

I think what you're referring to is what they call the three sheaths, or the sheath, the three dimensions on which we are physical beings and conscious beings, and one is our coarse physicality, which is born from Sperm and ovum and fed with potatoes and tomatoes and generates this course physical body that gives rise to coarse consciousness driven by sensory awareness on a more subtle level.

When we calm the sensory awareness and consciousness arises purely from the psychoneuro chemicals, the so called bindu in Sanskrit, the salung tigle, energies, pathways and drops. So at that time sensory awareness, the sensory spheres are calmed or sedated by means of meditation.

And consciousness arises on the basis of the subtle chemistry. So it's referring to that in states of deep meditation or yoga, sometimes in deep sleep and so on. Sometimes it can just happen naturally through kind of epiphany, you could say a conflux of auspicious conditions.

And the mind sort of slips in the body, mind slip into that mode. And the third is referring to the very subtle dimension of consciousness that moves from lifetime to lifetime. In other words, the mother clear light consciousness that carries karmic instincts.

Okay, now that's the real question there. It carries the karmic instinct.

Yeah, it said, I mean, carrying them, the consciousness rides on them like a rider on a horse is how it's put in traditional literature.

Say that again. It rides.

Consciousness rides on karmic instincts like a rider on a horse. I mean, you know, Tibetans rode horses. I guess we would say it more like it's like driving a BMW for some cylinder. No, no, twin 1000cc motorcycle down the autobahn at 120 miles an hour. The way your mind feels at that moment.

So if we're traveling from lifetime to lifetime, and so we're talking about two different things. We're talking about an essence or a very thine consciousness with that in association with that. Then there is a.

The energies that support it.

That's why.

The energies that support it, the energies that support it.

And then the.

That's it. Just those two things. So in tantric literature these are known as clear light, illusory body. Why is it illusory body? Because from that basic energy nucleus, the radiance of consciousness shines through and projects an outer world or a greater world or a bigger world.

So in that way, everything you experience is really a projection of your own karma, your own instinct, your own predispositions, your own momentum. Like 10 people walk into a room and they may all see the Mona Lisa. And some people will say nice smile. Other people will say what's she smiling at?

Other will people say is that a smile or is that like a grimace?

So how does this energy, this manifest itself into a DNA form? Then how does it go from that world to this one and end up in some sort of DNA structure.

Well, the way it's described is that when we die, then all of the energetic transformations of this lifetime, in everything we've seen, smell, tasted, touched, heard, thought about, and all of our interactions, which are all just energetic transformations, all withdraw, go from coarse level to subtle level.

At subtle level, go from the two main chakras to the heart, and then basically transform into the most subtle. And then we stop breathing and eventually get ready to leave the body. And leaving the body, leave in a very most subtle form.

Then in the Bardo, we come out, go out into the clear light and come out the other side in the bardo as a hereafter being, and it manifests as a subtle body.

Then we circle through the bardo and either, it said, go through these seven levels of transformation, and then it comes down to time to find what is the perfect reincarnation or the perfect body vessel for us.

So at that time, we search for the DNA and the RNA makeup that suit our predisposition, whether it's a tadpole or a horse or a human. And within the human realm, whatever is most appropriate to our next level of training.

So then our DNA becomes ancestral, basically, that's picking up through the stream of ancestral interactions.

So, okay, the. I guess that answers my question, but it. So the karma, then, if we think.

Of it, I think you would only say DNA in terms of the coarse body. You wouldn't say it in terms of the coarse body.

Yeah.

And you would certainly wouldn't say it in most of the. In terms of the most subtle body. So it's only to do with the coarse, buddy. So the question is, how do we choose the DNA structure that's most appropriate to us?

That's hard to say really, because also our DNA studies are very new, aren't they? Like, one very odd thing with DNA is you can have 10 people born with very similar DNA.

And before we thought your DNA like just even 10, 15 years ago, there was a strong idea that your DNA structure kind of determined a lot of things. But in reality, each of the DNA sequences has kind of an on, off switch, it seems like.

And so then why do particular switches go on and particular switches go off? And this is something we're just kind of investigating, isn't it? So in the Buddhist world, we'd say probably something to do with karmic winds or karmic energies.

Now also, we thought before you couldn't really change your DNA once you had it, but brain Studies in the last 10 years indicate that's probably not the case. That neurological sequencing seems to be transforming all the time.

So the idea that one is born violent or born with this predisposition or that predisposition genetically has got more to do with the switching on and off and the sequencing than it seems to be any kind of cut in stone kind of situation.

And for that reason, I think that sort of goes well with the Buddhist idea that whatever we are at birth and whatever our predispositions, we can completely transform them. And they talk about outer, inner secret transformations.

The outer being in your lifestyle, the inner being in the balance of your inner body chemistry. And the secret, I think, being on the very subtle level of the karmic winds.

Are we speaking metaphorically? The karmic winds? Are we.

No, no, no, no. I'm a literalist.

Okay. I thought you were.

That's why I've written 30 books. None of them are called the metaphors of Buddhism. But I do like that passage in that move, that Coen Brothers movie, Miller's Crossing, when they're talking about the Italian gangster is angry at the Irish gangster and the. And he's going to.

Is that I'm just talking metaphorically now. And then they say, well, if you don't, like, agree to this, then you're not going to leave this room. He says, now is that metaphorically?

I would like to add something. I mean, DNA within a family can produce hugely different outcomes. So I don't think it's that much of a factor. I think karma's a much.

And not just karma like now, but I mean, all the work you've done in your past lives towards meditation or towards dharma or whatever spiritual work you've been doing calls for way more than DNA, in my opinion.

Would anyone like to point out how wrong she is? That's right, Jeff. Yes, go ahead.

Well, I don't know much about this, but we were talking during the lunch break about how the butterflies, monarchy butterflies in Mexico, they fly from Canada and they travel all the way there and then they come back every year.

And in the recent years they are not going anymore, or there are less arriving because of the weather changes and other things.

But we were thinking they mentioned that these butterflies actually is the fourth generation that is not the same butterfly that left Mexico that year is the fourth generation that comes back.

And we were talking about that, how the DNA is so it remembers so well that has to be there at that time of the year. And I. I ask a question. So. So are we so do we as humans have that computer system or that GPS that we have to combat there? And does it happen to us in generations and generations?

And then we come back to the same place or to. Or we do the same things? Is that something that we are programmed? Is that only, is it karma? Is it what is it? Why in our new world we travel a lot more than we used to maybe hundreds of years ago. And why do we go to places that we shouldn't?

I mean, that are not naturally for us, but we pursue those places anyway.

Like, you mean Canadians going to Mexico for the winter.

Exactly.

Or Mexicans coming here, coming to Chicago.

To the tundra. It is very welcoming weather.

You know, I think the whole question of animal instinct from whether they're insects or birds or animals and animal intelligence is not a subject that I think humans understand very well.

We think because they have smaller brains, they must be less intelligent and therefore they're doing it on some kind of pre programmed method. We don't put it down to communication, we think of some kind of pre programming.

But I think that's just because we don't understand animal intelligence at all. Intelligence as humans, and we've never really studied it very much. And I don't know if we have the kind of brain that is able to understand butterfly IQ for all we know.

You know, grandfather butterfly says to the, you know, son or daughter butterfly, now when you get down to Florida, pull a fuel, go right for a couple of days and there's a big spot of water there, so have a big lunch before you take off to cross the Gulf of Mexico.

We really don't know, you know, that isn't what happens, that they have a system of actually communicating data other than just genetic impulse. There's nothing to indicate or prove that at all.

You know, we just, the Darwinians just started speaking about animals like that and people just repeat it like that's the way it is. I'm not sold on it. You know, for instance, geese flying south.

I was born on the east coast of Canada near the ocean, which is right on the migratory birth bird passage. No question those guys migrate by the stars. You know, they just basically are natural astronomers and they guide by the stars.

And it gets very cloudy and they get all confused, they can't see where they're going. And you'd often get two or three of them lost from the flock, sitting in the backyard and you know, going, hey guys, where'd you go? So I'm not convinced that they just fly by instinct.

I think they have a very subtle form of communication which is beyond the ability. Just like, you know, dogs can hear sounds that we can't hear because our brain can't process them and our eardrums are too coarse to pick those up. I think animals have a form and insects and so forth.

A form of communication which is much more subtle than ours. In a way. We've got kind of a coarse way of communicating because we have to go through very articulated ways, a very kind of clumsy articulation. For that reason, Nagarjuna says you can't. There's no words can describe enlightenment.

You have to generate the experience by means of meditation, study, meditation, contemplation, samadhi and essentially personal epiphany. No matter how much you describe it, you can't get it. But who's to say a butterfly can't with its way of processing information and generating experience.

But yeah, well, I mean with changing weather patterns and all the rest of the. They may decide, hell, Mexico's too far. And plus George W. Bush has moved to Texas and the Dalai Lama says he likes him. Maybe we'll take over his backyard.

I have another question that is more personal about the carmich I have just in the last years, I always was a little interested in my tree or my history, about my family tree and everything.

And then I've been looking and I couldn't find many answers and it was a little doubting and nobody really cared in my family. They cared. Part of them, some of them not. And then finally it seemed that I was the only one interested. But then I started.

Started meeting with others that wanted to know more too. And then all of a sudden I found a person that was actually. I kept putting pictures of my family, I kept putting this and that. My family tree is online family tree. And there it comes. It was already complicated for me to understand.

And then I. She puts one day she contact me after months when I had given up. I was like, I'm so tired. I'm gonna do it in another life. Probably because it's very time consuming. And then somebody comes to me and then tells me that she wants to talk to me.

And this is a historian person and she wants to know more about this person in my family. And I am like, who are you? Maybe you went to kidnap somebody. It's not. I am from Mexico, so I don't know. I thought that could happen there. So I was like, why? Asking many questions now do you know.

Why there's so much kidnapping in Mexico? I know because the Mexicans Are such good looking people. Nobody would kidnap an American. They're too ugly.

No, but at the end of the day, well, she tells me about this story, about this other story that I never had imagined. And then I come to conclusion that I don't relate to this type of person. I have no idea this could be in my.

And it is like in my mind I disconnect and I say it's over and this is not the story I want to hear. And I just disconnected. And then she is like, I'm so excited to find you. Do you want to tell your family? No.

So what? I missed the point. She is. What?

I met somebody that was studying a.

Person that was studying genealogy and it's like DNA genealogy.

Well, we haven't found out exactly if it's for sure, but she thinks that it's a part it's.

Or a reincarnation genealogy. Which one?

No, she's a historian.

Okay, okay.

But then after seeing the patterns of women and men in my family and seeing that one where she is trying to contact me and I don't like that personality and I just decided to there. And he said, well, it's very nice to know that you have that story, but I'm not interested.

And I felt to me was like a relief of so many, many, many generations of something. And to bring it up is not. But I don't know if that. If we can do that as like I felt that it was karmic history that I didn't know that I need to follow. And then when I found that I was like, poof.

This is not what I like. I throw it, I let go. I don't know. Can we really disconnect from that karmic generation?

Yeah, sure. There's an expression in Guya Samasha Tantra that says if you want to achieve enlightenment, you have to kill your mother and kill your father. In other words, we have a kind of cultural shape in the ordinary world which to some extent holds us back.

You know, if you're seven generations of cowboys, you'll probably be in it. Become a cowboy. If you want to go beyond cowboyism, you have to kill the inner cowboy.

So you learn some things from your mother, you learn some things for their father, but you also learn a lot of garbage from both of them. So just cultural garbage, prejudices. These kind of people are good. Those kind of people are bad. This color people are good. Those colored people are bad.

People from this village are good. People from that village are not good. This race is good. That race Isn't good. This idea is good. That idea is not. This religion is good. Everything from foods to these sort of judgments that come into secular culture.

So Guya Samaja says, since Gujas kill mother, kill father, if you want to achieve enlightenment now, on an outer level, it means we have to go beyond the secular culture of our father and our mother and our male and female ancestors.

Now, if we're born the son of a male Buddha and a female Buddha, then that's not the case. What we learn will be quite in tune with enlightenment. But otherwise, what we learn is usually a mixed bag of tricks. Some things are valid and useful and meaningful, and other things are nonsense.

Like in America, you'll hear even great beings like Donald Trump, you'll hear people saying funny and bad things about him. Isn't that true, Stephanie?

Anything you say, Glenn? Not.

But anyway.

So the idea that we have to go beyond our genetic past and our cultural past and move into a field of universalism, a kind of a universal consciousness which is equal to the universal consciousness of a million years before and a million years after, that's beyond this race or that race, this, this culture or that culture.

An outer level refers to that on an inner level, as often said, male energy is kind of aggression, and so we have to kill aggression and make it become compassion. Male is the instinct to kill. Female is an instinct to make love. The nature of female is to foster life.

And the role of the male is to kill and eat, because to live, we need to get something to eat. So, you know, we go out and kill a bunch of soybeans or kill some tomatoes or some wild parsnips in the jungle.

So to transform that male aggressive, conquering, dominating quality and transform it into compassion, and to take the female sort of caring in a kind of a limited tribal way and make it into a kind of a universal.

The wisdom that always sees the infinity of things in all beings, something like that. So on a kind of a deeper level or the inner level, kill father, kill mother has that kind of aspect.

And then on a genetic level, the secret level, the genes we inherited from mother and father will also be a mixed bag of tricks. And by doing the Kalachakra yogas of what's known as the empty body, we dissolve that dissolve or melt that genetic predispositioning.

So in one way, I think it is important to understand history. I love history personally, and I think it's important to understand history, to understand ourselves. But it's not necessary to go into it as deeply as it is to Go into the universality of our being.

Because it's the universality of our being which really brings us into harmony with the universal quality of being, the universal quality of life, the universal experience brings us closer to happiness and enlightenment.

You have a question?

Yeah, two things. Reincarnation. In the Buddhist, I guess, wave of beliefs. Do you come back in a female body and a male body and alternating each lifetime to balance out your both yin yang in that sexuality, or do you just stay being one sex the entire?

Myself, I've been male since the beginning of time, and anyone who says anything different gets a punch in the nose.

Actually, for instance, in Buddhist Abhidharma, which is, you could say philosophical and metaphysical literature, and especially in the Tibetan Book of the Dead, it said, as you wander through the Bardo, then you look for place of rebirth.

And when you find a couple that have the kind of perfect makeup for what would be your next incarnation, whether or not you become male or female is determined by the last moments before entering the womb. When you decide on the couple.

First you just see the couple making love, and then you think, well, that looks really good. That's a nice match. And I think it's just that you can sort of see yourself being a combination of those two physical looks and that whole ambience and the whole kind of quality energy level which is there.

At that point, you haven't really veered towards male or female. You've just identified the general landing ground, the room in which you're going to enter.

So according to the Abhidharma Literature and Tibetan Book of the Dead, as you sort of continue to observe them making love, then you start developing attraction for one of the two. And so then you think, oh, they're like, the guy is really handsome. Yeah, yeah, that's really nice.

Or the mother is really beautiful. So then your passion starts to move that direction. So then you become a little bit jealous and irritated at the other one, like the other person in the trio.

And eventually you develop very strong attraction for the one you're not going to be and anger to the one, the sex you're going to be, the gender you're going to be.

Then your anger becomes so great that eventually you just kind of blow up like a balloon that pops from the pressure and you die in the bardo and wake up in the womb. In other words, if you're attracted to your father at that time, you become a girl.

If you're attracted to your mother, you become a boy. So it's like Jung in his introduction to The Tibetan Book of the Dead says, this is classic Oedipus complex in Western psychology thinking. Someone at the back wants to say something. You have to get the. Have to take the microphone.

Just a real quick comment, more or less.

Pardon?

This is a comment as far as, like India style of astrology.

When they take a look at where you are choosing to be born, you know, you can kind of select, oh, I don't want to be with that set of parents, or I want you kind of more or less choose and you look for the optimal value of what you can do with that future life.

But the other thing that they look at is the taste and the. What taste? The taste. And so someone had done the chart thing, and they said, more or less, you look for where there was tart fruit growing. Well, my.

Where I went. Tart fruit.

Fruit, yeah.

Okay.

Yeah.

And sour, like you like gooseberries. So you.

Right. Sour tastes. And so she said to me, okay, what was there? Well, we had beautiful tart cherries, red currants. We had, you know, just beautiful fruit. It was a farm setting.

And so she said, you know, really, that's where you honed in and choosing to have this, why you were born into this particular family is it had these farm fruits that were just there and it had really beautiful sour tastes and red plums, the whole thing.

Well, I would agree with that because the place I was born and the family into which I was born didn't necessarily have many, many great qualities in kind of a secular way. But I would say my house, my dad's house was built on a land which had the most delicious water I've ever tasted in my life.

When I was 9 years old and broke my leg and went to a hospital, if anyone came to visit, other people would ask for chocolates or candies or fruit. I'd say, please bring me a couple of bottles of well water from my dad's house. But I think in the Buddhist world, we think that reincarnation is a.

The higher up in the 49 cycles. 49 days or 49 cycles, the higher up you take rebirth, the better the circumstance. So people's a very high. You said people with very high positive karma take rebirth very quickly, within a few hours or minutes or days of death.

And also people with very negative karma. That's like throwing a lead ball into a. One is like throwing a lead ball into a lake. It goes straight to the bottom. The other is throwing like a balloon into a lake, and it immediately comes to the top. And peoples of unresolved Karma, very mixed karma.

Take the full 49 cycles and then eventually they just come out the other end. So they're very much a mixed, mixed bag of tricks.

In other words, their reincarnation is sort of a combination of what they deserve as sort of punishment for their evil deeds in past lives, combined with which you could say challenges that will help with the purification of those karmas and also what are the positive sides of their positive karmic energies.

So it's a combination of those two. So a little bit like being reborn in Chicago, which is a beautiful city with great buildings and many great history. And at the same time you've also got like bad weather, traffic jams, or you're reborn in a place like South Africa, like Nelson Mandela.

It's a very tough situation. He's reborn as a black in South Africa during apartheid and kind of difficult situation. But at the same time he's got a lot of good completing karma and comes through it in such a way as to be manifests greatness.

Buddhists like, to quote people like Angili Malaborn, takes up murder as an occupation, kills a thousand or so people, but then has good completing karma, learns from it, turns over a new leaf and becomes a great being or Buddha, born as a Prince and has three, three wives and 500 pleasure girls and thinks enough is enough, too much is too much, and leaves home and takes up meditation.

Someone over here.

When you're in the bardo and you decide you would like to come back to the animal kingdom.

Well, I don't think we think you would like to come back. I think what it is, you know, this is what we call in the Buddhist world, these are called karmic winds or karmic energies. You're pushed by your karmic momentum to do something.

And that pushing in particular directions drags you or propels you in particular directions. And so at one point or another, that direction you're meeting goes between the hereafter world and a window into one of the six realms.

So the traditional way on the Abhidharma from India with the wheel of life, if you have a very strong violent hate thought that'll throw you into the hell realms, a very strong attachment, addiction, obsessive thought that'll throw you into the ghost realms or hold you, drag you into the ghost realms and sort of mindless casualness, throw you into an animal realm, arrogance into a human with negative conditions, jealousy, yet with many good strong meditative or spiritual qualities.

Then Asora pride and arrogance with great samadhi and other spiritual Qualities, one of the worldly heavens. That's the kind of language that's used in the Buddhist Abhidharma. Nobody thinks.

Now then, after you become a first level Bodhisattva, if you take the precept to achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all beings, and then you achieve Aryas, you become an Arya. Then you have the power of controlled rebirth from that time on.

So thereafter you never take compulsive rebirth again. You're never thrown into a rebirth from karma, from karma and delusion. Karma, Eklesha, you always look.

So in my case, I was floating around and I thought, well, let's see, how can I benefit the whole universe in my next experience, incarnation, I think I'll be reborn in a very remote little unobscure village on the east coast of Canada.

Now is a good point to tell us about your story.

Yes. So I decided I needed to be reborn in such a way as to save the.

What is your soul's mission before you're born?

If you, if you're doing today is.

What you chose to do.

Oh, you have to give her the microphone when she's talking.

Well, everybody wants to hear you and they may not be able to hear you.

No, no, it's for the recording.

Right, the recordings.

Oh, I don't want to be recorded.

Well, I can't answer unless you're recorded.

That's fine. Your soul's mission before you came into the world, into the physical life, was do what you're doing today. Teach people about the Buddhist religion and how.

What? Yeah, I don't teach people about the Buddhist religion. I teach people how to attain enlightenment, how to become a Buddha.

Okay. It's the.

When I met the Dalai Lama, he said, remember, we don't need more Buddhists. We got millions of them. We need more Buddhas, enlightened beings. Okay. But whether or not that was my soul's mission is another thing.

But how do you describe that?

I think from my side, Buddhist language would say that being reborn with a father who is a very honest, strong, committed to truth kind of person would be a good throwing karma.

And my mom having a lot of knowledge and respect for, for international world traditions was also a strong positive karma from my side to have that link. So even though I'm born in a remote place, it was in a place with books on Taoism and Buddhism and Hinduism and Sufism and so forth.

So that would be a kind of a good throwing karma. Also having the good karma to meet with the Dalai Lama and his two great gurus. Who are the three greatest masters in the Buddhist world at that time would be something of a good karma. I would have liked to have had a better kind of bankroll.

That would have helped. But I suppose I shouldn't complain about the details. I had to travel by either my own motorcycle or by public transport. I didn't get to do like Donald Trump and fly on a private airplane everywhere.

Or what is her name, Nancy Baloski, who keeps a private 747 for her and her bunch of fellow criminals to fly back and forth from Washington to San Francisco. So I had a little bit of bad completing karma in that I didn't have as much of a bankroll as I would have liked. I had to drive like in India.

I started with a Czechoslovakian Yezdi motorcycle, not a BMW, not a Harley Davidson. But we would say, yes, that if you look at your own life you can see some things which were great blessings and which are the results of your good karma.

We would say you can also see some kind of problems that happen in life. Limitations of that which we would say something to do with a negative karma.

What if that's just your own self limitations that are self imposed because you're.

They don't use that kind of oh, self. They could be self imposed, I suppose.

It doesn't have to be past life. It could be this life.

Well, you know, people are born. Can be born very short or very funny looking and stuff like that. So those would be kind of limitations. They can be reborn in a place where there's a lot of poverty, so they don't get enough food as babies and as kids. That's kind of a.

So they can be reborn with many other good situations. But those kind of karmic limitations. There are personal limitations, but I think different than karmic limitations in the Buddhist way of thinking of it. At least Ed had something. So we better let the microphone go that way.

And Ed's a very wise man, so he's always got something very profound and deep to say, which is not the case. Now a quick review. Can you go over the chakras associated with each color? Yes. Yellow, red, white, red, green and blue and green again.

White in the forehead chakra, red in the throat chakra, blue in the heart chakra, yellow in the navel chakra and green in the root chakra. That makes sense, of course. What when we send them, you go 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. You don't start at the top and work down or start at the bottom and work up.

Probably the Reason for that is because heart is more subtle, and then so on. So the microphone behind.

Thank you. I was a little surprised when you mentioned that the red is the color of bliss. And I thought it was like pink or white. Why red?

I think often in the tantric world, white and pink. White is the color of wisdom, of emptiness, and pink is the color of great bliss experienced through that wisdom.

So, for instance, often paintings of Sankapa, the guru of the first Dalai Lama, show him white with a flush of pink, wisdom of emptiness with a little flush of great bliss. So that's usually said like that. The white and red.

And in this painting, for instance, she's dancing, she's holding a skull cup filled with the nectar, the blood of great bliss. So the white of the skull cup represents the wisdom of emptiness or infinity, and the red represents the great bliss.

That makes sense. Thank you.

I never know how to talk on the microphone. Can you hear me?

Yeah. Just put it a little closer. That much closer, since we're on that business. This feels like such a beginner question.

But when we did those five colors in the last cycle, whatever there was, could you name again the Buddhas that.

Were or the Amitayus that we're visualizing?

Oh, if we put in the name of the five Buddha families, then. Varochana. Varochina. No, no, no. You can look at me and just remember it. You don't have to write it. What is that expression? White woman. Memory is a piece of paper. Amitabha Red. Akshobia. Blue. Akshobia.

Akshobia.

If you don't pronounce it, if you know how, you can write it down. If you don't know how to pronounce it. A, K, S, H, O, B, Y, A. Then yellow. Ratna sambhava.

Ratna sambhava.

Yeah. Which means Rinchenjung, source of jewels, source of preciousness. And amoga siddhi.

Amoga siddhi.

So siddhi means power or activity. Amalga means accomplishing or doing without limit sort of thing. So spontaneous accomplishment or effortless accomplishment. What?

That was green.

Not only green, but beautiful emerald green. Like Ireland in spring.

She's saying like the ribbon on the arrow.

Yes, yes, Perhaps. I can't see it from here, but it's probably true. So we want the microphone over here again. See, Stephanie was complaining about her niece or making her carry the microphone to give her knee good exercise.

Thank you. My next question is why, if we have noticed or realized, what are our limitations and what are our karmic things? How do we change this, when we have recognized them and we said, okay, well, this was my path. Da, da, da. But now I realize that life should be joyful. This should be that.

And then I just decided to live in that way. I want to live that way. However, the rest of the world has already created this image. And then you say, oh, this is. How do we change the world around that?

You know, yesterday I mentioned the second Dalai Lama. The seventh Dalai Lama, in one of his poems, says, grab the reins of the horse of your life and guide with discipline. In other words, we improve ourselves day by day, week by week, month by month.

Spiritually, enlightenment may be a sudden process in the end, but getting to that point of the sudden enlightenment is always a process. So the Kadampas had a wonderful saying. When you're with other people, watch. Watch your speech. And with yourself, watch your mind.

In other words, meditate quietly when you're alone, and watch your mind, and you'll see things about yourself. You'll learn more about yourself every time you sit down to meditate. When we go about ordinary life, mostly we just learn about external things.

The things we see, smell, taste, touch and hear. Hair. And we don't learn much about ourselves. When you sit and meditate, you're really observing your own inner flow, putting the mind on the breath. Breathe in with joy and out with joy. Thoughts come and go like clouds in the sky.

Emotions come and go like clouds in the sky, and you notice them. And the more you do that, the better you understand your own inner processing. And unless we meditate or sit silently or quietly or introspectively, most people never notice that.

They just notice what's going around them in their life and what they're doing at work and with the kids and the family and hobbies and TV and those kind of things. Then when we notice. The first Dalai Lama, also a wonderful poet, said, there are three difficulties.

The first is noticing a negative trait. The second, once you've noticed it, is turning it away, twisting it out, turning it. And thirdly, the third difficulty is utterly uprooting it. So if we notice something about ourself, also the early Kadampas, if you notice a fault in yourself, you.

You should dance for joy like you found a precious treasure, because noticing it, you can easily cure it by means of the three difficulties. You have the first of the three difficulties, and you can't go to difficulty number two or difficulty number three until you get to number one.

So if you find fault in yourself, rejoice like you found a precious treasure. All Himalayan Buddhists, Central Asian Buddhists. Like at the end of the day to sit quietly and do Vajrasattva practice.

That means looking at what happened during your day and just reliving it in your mind and just sitting, seeing what kind of after flavor you get from it.

You know, if you're mean to your husband or boyfriend or girlfriend or kids or pets or co workers or anything like that, just notice a negative after flavor and think, oh shit. And then do a couple of I invoke the enlightened beings, past, present and future, the ten directions as witness.

I have found a precious treasure. And then make a resolution that, well, you know, today I got angry and hit my husband or boyfriend or girlfriend on the head with a bat. I won't do that again.

Make a strong resolve to watch for, monitor that kind of energetic exchange or transformation and then do some like vajrasattva mantras or something like that to sort of make it a little bit stronger.

So doing that every evening before going to bed is said to be the most powerful, singularly most powerful practice for transcending your own bad habits, limitations and personal faults and failings.

And we get personal faults and failings because of our education and our upbringing and our general slothfulness and unthinking and unmindfulness and so on and so forth. So the key to success is mindfulness awareness and taking it to task. Harold wanted to say something.

I wanted to go back to the colors, but very quickly. So are you saying we can attain enlightenment in a lifetime if we do it right?

Any of my students who don't achieve enlightenment before the time of death, I'm giving them all their money back in the bardo.

Oh good.

They get a full refund from any workshop they've attended in their next life. They will be reborn with that in their little place piggy bank. Their grandfather will have left that plus 10 times more in trust for them even before they knew it was going to be you born there.

It's always said in every tantric text that anyone can achieve enlightenment, regardless of age and gender and all of these kind of things.

I'm just going to give you an IOU for everything so I don't have to get my money back anyway.

And then when you get it back, it'll just be an iou. Go to the trust fund and they'll say when you reach the age of 80.

Okay, when you're talking about the crown chakra, are you talking about this one or this one?

It's basically the center of the Brain.

Okay, all right. Because I was a little bit confused.

Yeah. Between the amygdala and the hippocampus.

Okay, all right. Because I'm sorry.

Yeah. If someone were to take a nail and drive it straight through your head at the point between your eyebrows, bang. Like William Tell with the arrow. Right where? At the very center.

Yeah, like the third eye, but it's at the center of the brain at the point between the amygdala and the hippocampus.

And those are two very important parts because the amygdala controls the stress and relaxation part of the body and together with the hippocampus also is very responsible for releasing the various peptides and other brain chemistry, including my favorite dopamine.

They give a sense of well being and contribute to the health well being of everything.

Well, I was wondering because it was. I was sort of confused a little bit. When we were building our shields around ourselves, our force fields, we went heart, throat, crown, gut, root.

Yeah.

And.

And the gut is really four fingers below the navel, just in front of the backbone. Okay.

So you're. Okay, gotcha.

So the root is halfway between the anus and the genitalia, about a half inch up into the body.

All right. So as we build the shield, which.

As Eric will tell you, is also a very important acupuncture point, he once got in trouble, he told me, for giving a Korean nun acupuncture on that point. What? Oh, okay. Okay. What? Irish. Oh, goodness. Okay. How did the Korean come in? Oh, there was a Korean doctor there who was irritated.

Little did he know. We Irish like that sort of thing. We like to be rescued by Koreans. We're so used to rescuing Koreans that it's nice if it happens the other way around once in a while. Right. Yes. Over here.

Since we're locating the chakras that we're using for this, the red throat chakra, could you describe the location?

Anyway, that second point, it's usually described the root of the tongue. So go up to someone you don't like, pull out their tongue and see where the root is. I think it's kind of just behind the soft spot below the Adam's apple is my opinion on it.

But I don't know if pinpoint accuracy is of paramount importance. But basically it's said to be at the root of the tongue. And Tibetan, I think physiologists were quite good on this sort of thing on kind of their bird offering.

You know, they offer chop people up at death and feed them to the birds so they knew exactly where the tongue went to.

And often, you know, they would take out the eyes and the ears and the nose and the mouth, the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and I forget one more piece for the body and grind them up together separately as the offering of the five senses. Should we demonstrate that.

That one volunteer for that? I have a friendly question about what's friendly. I thought I would preface it that way so you wouldn't get anxious.

Friend of the world, I have a friendly question about what you said about the crown chakra and driving the, you know, the metal spike through which I've heard you say before. So now, for instance, in poa practice, you take poa, you know, you actually feel a lot of pressure here.

You can feel that pressure in meditation. So is that. And you leave through the crown chakra.

No, you don't.

You don't. Well, some people do.

No, you leave through the Brahma aperture, the hole in the top of the head.

Okay, so. Well, I'm here to tell you that a lot of Tibetan Buddhists tell you you leave through the crown chakra.

Well, I'm here to tell you that there's more Tibetan text which says that on poa, the tsongpei ne ne means aperture or place. Or sometimes called sangp, which means the cave or the hole. The Brahma hole.

So you're saying Brahma hole.

Right. You see, because when you do poa practice, you don't visualize the chakras. You don't imagine the chakras, right?

That's correct.

I mean, I suppose you could say that passes through where the chakras would be if you happen to be doing chakra practice. But in the poa practice, you don't do chakra practice. You see the base of the central channel, and it gets a little wider as you go up.

And you see the mouth at the top, and you see open sky above, and you see the dakini or whatever is placed there. And you see the womb of the dakini, the birth passage of the dakini. Should I go on?

No. In all these breath yogas, though, then when you're pulling it up to the crown chakra, you're only pulling it up.

It doesn't say crown chakra. It says, pull it up to the place where the yogini is visualized. You pull it up to the mouth of the Brahma aperture. To the mouth of the Brahma aperture in these diagrams.

And where you're pulling the. I'm talking about when you say in your instructions, go to the crown Chakra, you're saying go here, not up here. Because I've always said correct.

Correct.

Okay, correct. Because I've always heard people say other people, not you. And I'm not saying that they're right. You're wrong. I'm sure you're right.

I'm sure you're wrong. Well, let me say that it's a friendly question.

That's why it's a friendly question.

But, you know, it depends on the practice, because there are practices one does in which one visualizes a seventh chakra above the fifth.

And they tell you, be careful.

So a six is up there, and the seventh, rather than the root chakra, is the G spot on the ladies or the tip of the penis on the men if you use seven chakras. But if it's only five, it's the five I just stated, as in this practice.

Right. It's a source of, you know, I'm glad you've clarified. It was somewhat of a source of confusion because I've been told, you know, I mean, I've heard, observed.

So we shouldn't call that a friendly question. We should say that's a confused question.

No, it's not A good. No question is confused. It's a question by its very nature. It's not, it's not definite, doesn't have a definite answer. It's not definite knowledge. Who else would like to ask a question?

I think that's enough for now. What? Was there one more?

Ivona.

What?

Ivona would like to ask one.

Oh, really? Okay. Okay.

So we can ask that question.

One.

What?

I, I'm sorry, Is it. Yes. Okay.

I'm not sure, but I think, you know, I, I, I heard somewhere that when you reincarnate, you kind of reincarnate with the spirits, you know, the, the people that were close to you will also manifest in different reincarnations and that you eventually meet them or they are close to you.

Is that true or there is no evidence, hopefully, for that.

Well, I think there is the basic sense in all Indian traditions that people with close karmic connections, especially spiritual connections, will be like a stream of swallows or what do they call them? Something of fish? A swarm of.

No, so a swarm of bees, a school of fish, or a flock of birds, that they play roles with one another for many, many long lifetimes on the spiritual path. That's very often said, and we see it in the biographies of, say, the Buddha, the previous lives of the Buddha.

At one point, he was born in Nepal, and when he was in Nepal, in that previous life he was a prince and there were three sons and they went out for a walk and there was a tiger female whose cubs were dying and she was so hungry and thirsty she couldn't walk. So. So they're all going to die.

So the princes went home and then one of them went back, he thought, poor Tigris. So he cut his wrists and fed blood into her mouth until she came strong enough to get back up. And then she cut off some flesh and fed it to them and gave little bits to the baby tigers. That's dedication, huh?

Now that guy's got commitment to tiger, preserving tiger life. He puts his body where his mouth is. But then later it said of those three, one was Buddha, another was Maitreya, and the other was Manjushri.

And those three, lifetime upon lifetime for many thousands of millions of years manifest together to accomplish great deeds. Buddha's father, the mother and father of that prince were later reborn as the mother and father of Buddha.

Tigris was reborn as, I can't remember who, and I think his aunt who raised him after Buddha's mother died seven days after his birth. And the five cubs became the five first disciples. Jataka tales have hundreds of stories like that. And the tales of all Tibetan masters do.

Most Tibetan masters do Atisha in a previous life was this and Dram Dunpa was that and Moklok Sawa. So I think in the Buddhist world there is a belief that people who have close spiritual connections that builds lifetime to lifetime is kind of like a flock of migrating birds eventually.

No, no, Monarch butterflies eventually arriving in the rainforest of Mexico, perhaps to the great city of enlightenment and building great civilizations and so forth. So I think that is there.

So I think we'll just do a few more mantras before we finish for our afternoon session because 4:30 is the announced time. But we did start 15 minutes late. I can't remember whose fault it was. Eric's, I think. So let's do the mantraamarani Jivantaye Soha.

And first we do it for sending out sunrise radiance from the vase and fill an all negative, whatever life force has been damaged or distorted by negative encounters with others and pulling that back and generating great forgiveness for self and others.

And it fills the vase and overflows and completely fills our body and we become infused with wisdom of immortality here meaning with the mindset which is completely driven by a sense sense of our great health, healing power, abundance, power, fullness, power, Shua de viv Power O maman Jintaye Soha and then simultaneously, all five at once.

Yellow for earth, white for water, red for fire, green for air, and blue for space. These five radiances shine forth and bring back the essences of four elements, all in balance, overflow and completely heal the elements of the outer body as well as the elements of the subtle cellular system.

Omaran is in is entire O Mama Run is in thay so.

---

## PART 4
*Source: 04_Glenn Mullin - Healing through Meditation Mantra and Color Thera-01.txt*

Sam.

Sambha Vashodo Sabha Dhamma Sabha Vah Shodoham.

So let's start as we did the previous sessions.

Putting the mind on the breath for a few moments.

Breathe in with joy, breathe out with joy.

Feel the pleasure of the body and the delight of the mind with the sense of the passing breath.

There's.

Then invoke the presence of enlightened masters, past, present and future of the ten directions.

Come into this room.

Inspire us all right now.

Invoke the inspiration of the dedication to truth and wisdom.

And invoke the inspiration of Sangha, our spiritual friends who are mature and inspiring in their practice and realization.

May all beings of happiness in the cause be free from suffering in the cause, rest in joy without downfall, and learn to have empathy for all beings equally, both pleasant and unpleasant.

Om Sabha Vashodo Sarva Dhamma Sobha Vaishodo Hum.

All things dissolve into emptiness, the world and its inhabitants.

And dissolve into light.

Dissolves into my body, my body into the flame at my heart.

And that into all unapprehensible, the inapprehensible, inconceivable sphere of radiance.

And out of that inapprehensible sphere I arise with my body in normal form, but made of pure radiance, pure energy.

Amitias upon my head, the vase of immortality in his hands.

So the two sessions so far we've covered the first section of the generation stage, or the first stage, the mandala practice, and one of the eight completion stage practices.

Let's do the second of the eight completion stage practices, meaning borrowed from the Hayagriva Tantra.

In the center of our body we visualize the chakras and the NADIs, the three energy channels, the right slightly larger and the center slightly larger.

And on the right and left running from the center of the forehead.

The center comes up to the center of the forehead and comes to the third eye.

The other two from the nostrils to the center of the forehead and coming down on the sides, maybe a half inch or even less, separate from another maybe a half a centimeter.

About the thickness of the center one, the thickness of a Coca Cola straw.

A thin Coca Cola straw.

And the side one's a cocktail stirrer.

For you teetotalers, you won't know the size of the second one.

It'll remain a mystery.

And the center one is whitish and blue.

And the one to the right red.

The one on the left, white, comes down and inside curls up.

And inside the center, the two side ones curl up into the center one like pipes, I suppose.

And just above, at the navel chakra, with 32 petals.

Heart chakra, 8 petals, navel chakra, no throat chakra, 16 petals.

Crown chakra, 64 petals.

But we can just sort of see them like flowers rather than the more mechanical way.

And on the sun disc at the navel, and moon disc at the crown, crown, meaning the center of the brain.

Red amitias at the navel, and white amitias in the crown, just in single form, not male, female in union, just single solitary amitias, as in the painting here.

And we can do this with or without v breathing, Often done without vas breathing.

The vase breathing is sometimes done later, as in the practice we did earlier.

But some people do it with vas breathing.

One puts one's attention on the amitias at the navel chakra and at the vase in his hands.

Now, he's about the size of a fingernail, perhaps of your little finger in his hands, a vase.

In that vase, the complete mandala of amitayas.

And in that center of that mandala, another amitayas.

In his hands, a vase.

And at the center of that vase, the red syllable riya.

And we quietly recite the mantra Omrani and jivantaye soha.

And from that little vase in the hands of the Amitayas, lights go forth, fill the ten directions.

We can do the mantra with sound, but when.

When it's done as a completion, stage, practice, the mantra is usually done quietly, just in one's mind.

Lights go out and fill the ten directions.

And they do the same as they did at the beginning with the five elements.

Pull back the essence of earth and pull it into the vase in the hands of the amitayas.

In our navel chakra, earth element comes in the form of golden lights, and in the form of mountains and rocks and boulders and earthquakes and so forth, and flows into the vase and melts and becomes red.

Wisdom of immortality or nectar of immortality.

Medicine of immortality.

Tibetan word is Dutse.

Sanskrit word is Amrit.

So it comes in yellow, melts, turns red from the intense heat of the amitayas wisdom.

And the vase then overflows, and the overflow flows into the 32 navel petals.

And completely at the beginning, we sort of imagine they're kind of dry and brittle and not very like a car that hasn't been driven in years or a piano that hasn't been played in a long time.

And the nectar flows into the 32.

No, 68, 16, 32, 64 naval petals.

Of the navel.

So the 64 flows into the 64 and completely moistens them and rejuvenates them, and restores them to complete health, to complete strength and complete Tibetan the words Lehrung, which means usability, Omarani Jimantayas, Omarani Chivantayas, Omarani Chivanti.

After doing a few mantras, you can do a vase breath or two, V breathes and press the energy into the navel chakra and generate the sense that the 64 navel petals are being completely restored to well being.

Then we repeat the process, and this time when the vase overflows the red, so it goes out and brings in the yellow earth element.

And it overflows and brings in the earth element in the form of mountains, rocks, boulders, planets, meteors and comets and so forth, and overflows.

And this time the overflow rises up the center channel and comes to the heart chakra.

And in the heart chakra flows into the eight lotus petals, or the eight channels, rejuvenates, restores, heals them.

And again we turn the attention to the navel chakra.

And gold lights go out and pull in the earth element, and all comes back, drawn back into the vase.

And it overflows.

And the red flows up from the navel to the heart chakra, and then from the heart chakra to the throat chakra.

And in the throat chakra, the liquid and the radiance flows into the 16 channel petals, completely restoring, rejuvenating, moistening and enlivening them.

And then a fourth time we turn the attention to the navel chakra.

The vase and Amitaya San send out lights and brings back the essence of the earth element, turns, melts, turns into red nectar of wisdom, immortality, overflows and rises up from the navel chakra to the heart chakra, to the throat chakra, and up to the crown chakra with the 32 petal channels.

There it flows into the petal channels and completely moistens and enlivens and restores and rejuvenates them.

And in particular the female element in each of the four chakras is restored, healed, and made completely strong, like at the time of one's conception, the time of one's birth.

One then turns attention to the white Amitayas in the crown chakra, in his hands a vase, and in the vase the complete mandala of Amitayas.

And at the center of that mandala, little Amitias in his hands of vase, the syllable ri in the form of a little red flame, and sends out a White light sends out yellow light and brings back the essence of the earth element.

Comes back as golden light and mountains and rocks and boulders overfills and turns into white white liquid the color of male energy and male essence.

And this over we take a vase breath and hold it at the navel, but concentrating on the crown chakra.

And it overflows from the vase.

And the white moon like liquid flows into the 32 channel petals and completely moistens, restores and especially restores the male element in them.

And we take a vase breath as that healing takes pressure.

And we again turn the attention to the vase in amitayas hands.

White amitayas in the crown chakra lights go out and pull back the essence of the earth element.

And it comes in and form of mountains, rocks and great flow and melts and becomes white male nectar overflows and flows down the central channel and comes to the heart chakra.

No throat chakra flows into the 16 energy channel petals, totally healing and restoring them, and in particular reviving and resuscitating the male element of the chakra Nadi system.

O Mamarani Jeevan Tayasoha.

Then we do a vase breath again turning the attention to the white amitias.

And the crown chakra sends out lights, fills the universe with golden light and pulls back the essence of the earth element.

It overflows and the overflow comes down from the crown chakra to the throat chakra to the heart chakra, flows into the eight energy channels, channel petals, totally heals, restores and rejuvenates, and in particular strengthens and revives the male element of the chakra.

Then we do a vaj breath and hold the energy in that way.

It.

Again we turn the mind to the white amitayas in the crown chakra and to the vase in the hands and to the hri, sends out lights, fills the universe, golden lights brings back the essence of the earth element in the form of great mountains and boulders and comets and meteors and all go into the vase.

It overflows, turns white nectar and overflows and overflows through the crown chakra.

The throat chakra, heart chakra comes down to the navel chakra and in the navel chakra flows into the 64 petal channels, completely reviving, restoring and in particular healing the male quality of the earth element in the navel chakra.

And then we take a vase breath or two.

It.

So here, as we saw in the six yogas of Naropa, first we begin with the navel chakra and raise the female element, the red element, which is in nature the sun.

And after the red element is brought up, then this brings warmth, bliss, joy, and a kind of sense of well being, of pleasure to the whole body.

And as the red essence.

I thought you were catching flies.

As the red essence flows into the each of the chakras in turn, it heals the earth element, but in the female aspect of the earth element, then coming down does the same with white nectar.

So then we repeat that process with white for water, with red for fire and green for air.

And we don't have to do it with blue for space, because doing it individually like that, I guess it's just taken for granted that the blue for space will be okay.

It's literally called jungwa, which means the four elements.

And the space isn't one of those four.

So if you do it as a practice for each of the four first going up and each of the four then coming down, then the practice will maybe take something like an hour for the whole session with the four elements.

Otherwise, the first Dalai Lama says in his commentary, you can just do all four elements at once coming up, and then all four elements at one coming down.

So you send out yellow, white, red, green lights to all directions from the navel.

And it brings back the essence of the four elements into the vase and it overflows and it turns red.

After it melts, it turns red from the power of the female quality of Amitias, overflows and fills the navel, then comes up next to breath to the heart and then to the throat chakra, then to the crown chakra.

Similarly from the crown chakra, taking it down, goes out and flows, comes down first from the with all four healing the white male elements of the five elements in the crown chakra, then throat, then heart, then navel.

I think when one gets the transmission, the teaching, one hears it for first time.

It sounds a little bit complicated, but when you do it as a practice a few times becomes very, very clear and well structured.

So now I think we'll go back to the generation stage, or the first stage, which is using the mantra and visualization, not using the chakra Nadi.

And here the third of the four steps is known as absorbing the power of the powerful ones.

Are absorbing the blessings of the powerful ones, absorbing the qualities of the powerful ones.

And that has two the worldly powerful ones and the beyond the world powerful ones.

Each of the cases we send out first a white, then red and then blue lights.

We see our body as amitias, as in our body is made of light and radiance.

And on our head the Amitias.

In his hands a vase.

In that vase, a mandala of Amitias.

In the center of the amitias mandala is Amitayas little Amitias.

In his hands, vase.

And the vase, the silbo fri. First sends out white light, covers the whole earth and then sinks into the earth, goes under the earth.

And going under the earth it attracts all of the forces and blessings of the great powerful ones of the earth.

That means things like the mountain spirits, lake spirits, nagas, who live in all of the trees in the forests.

So all of the forces of nature.

And where does abundance come from?

Everything we humans have comes out of the earth, doesn't it?

The fruits grow out of the earth and the vegetables grow out of the earth, and the trees grow out of the earth and the waters come from the mountains and bring us all we need, and so on and so forth.

So the white light fills all of that.

And if we can learn to harmonize with the nature spirits, the nature spirits lend us their blessings.

In lending us their blessings, our life becomes happy, harmonious and abundant.

So we do the mantra sending out first white light and it goes, covers the whole earth and then goes into the earth and under the earth, absorbs the blessings of all of the forces of nature, comes back into the vase which overflows and the overflow enters our body via our crown aperture, completely fills us with that white energy like a milk like energy, and brings complete healing of all negative conditions created and illnesses, cause of illness, poverty and causes of poverty, and so on.

Created by being out of harmony with nature, by having poor relationships with fruits and, and vegetables, mountains and lakes, rivers and streams, and so forth.

And the sort of spiritual energies represented by those things.

Omrani jeevantayaso aha.

Mamrani jeevantaya soha.

Omamarani jeevantaya soha.

Omamarani jeevantaya soha.

Omamarani jeevantaya soha Omara ni jivantaya soha.

And secondly, again we turn the attention to the Amitayas on our head, on the crown of our head, and the Vasani's hands, the mandala, the Amitayas at the center of the mandala, the Vasanese hands, the Hri at the center, and send out lights.

And this time red light goes out and fills, covers the surface of the earth and brings back all desirable human qualities like great powers of memory and the power.

Traditional texts say things like the power of kings, the musical talents of great rock and roll artists.

No, it doesn't mention rock and roll.

The musical talents of great music musicians, the poetic abilities of great poets, the wealth of great business people, the fame of famous beings, and so on.

Every desirable human quality is brought back.

Every human quality by which we, as practicing Tantrikas and practicing Bodhisattvas, committed to benefiting all beings as much as we can.

All those qualities drawn Brahn back.

So in ordinary Buddhism we say we shouldn't matter, shouldn't take much attention to gain or loss, pleasure, pain, fame or obscurity, praise or criticism.

But in Tantra we proactively go after all of the positives in that list on the basis of the Bodhisattva dedication to benefiting the world as much as we can do.

So we pull back, try to have greater strength, greater power in the world, greater influence, greater wealth, greater health, greater intelligence, memory.

And we can do for very specific things that we think we're a little bit lacking in.

Like in America, I think they could improve their senses of humor, they could pull back more of the funny bone.

No, America's got some of the best, best comics in the world.

So what else do they need?

Oh, pull back.

They should pull back the karma to have better political candidates in times of election.

We should think in our life those things that we think with, those qualities which would make us more efficient as universal heroes, heroines, trying to bring great benefit in the world.

And of course, all these things are relative, aren't they?

You meet people with a million dollars and they think they're poor.

Donald Trump was talking.

He said, oh yes, as a young man, my father gave me a small loan of a million dollars to start my business.

And most people would think of a loan of a million dollars as being significant.

So when we say wealth, abundance, power and so on, these are totally relative.

It just means, I think, that we should feel competent, free, healthy, strong, and be able to do as much on a 24 hour basis as is our karmic limit for the benefit of self and others, to bring transformations in this world and strengthen the happiness, the joy and the enlightenment orientation of the world.

OMA Mrs. OMAMRANI JEEVANTAYA so how?

And in this way, every desirable humanoid quality comes back in the form of red lights into the vase.

It overflows and flows into us via the crown aperture and completely activates within us those qualities of healing and well being.

It heals our social life, heals our financial life, heals our secular life, heals Our musical life heals, our artistic life heals, our poetic life and so on.

And then we send blue lights, turn our attention to Amitias above our head, the vase in his hands, the mandala in the vase.

Little Amitias at the center of the vase sends out lights.

Blue lights, lapisluz lie and fills all of the heavens.

So the white for the first went below the Earth, the second, the red went on the face of the Earth, and the blue fills the heavens and goes to all the other planets and universes and world systems in which there are other qualities that aren't common in human world, such as in some planets, beings live for 50 or 100,000 years, and until they're maybe 90,000 years old, even the word illness never arises.

In other world systems, beings have the ability of floating and flying and levitating, walking through walls.

Other systems beings have the power of clairvoyance, reading the minds of others, remembering past lives as clearly as looking in a crystal ball and so forth.

So all of the, you could say the worldly spiritual powers like clairvoyance and magical abilities.

The eight ordinary siddhis, as they're called in Tantra, the Great Atisha, the founder of the Dalai Lama School of Buddhism, said that if we can gain a more a gentle mind with an intuitive awareness which leads in the direction of clairvoyance.

With clairvoyance, one moment, one day of our life is as beneficial as a hundred years without it.

Our bodhisattva work.

One day of bodhisattva work can be like a hundred years without it.

And clairvoyance here isn't a big thing.

I think it's kind of the relaxed mind which can look at people and see what's really going on with them and have a sense of their flow and then communicate with them on that very deep level rather than superficial communication.

So we do the mantra, Om Amarani Jeevantayas, Omarani Jeevantayas Om Amarani Jeevantayas.

Om Amarani Jeevantaya Soamabrani Jeevantaya somalan.

The vase overflows and the lapis lusalai.

Light fills our body and completely activates our karmic predispositions to achieve those extraterrestrial qualities, the qualities of the worldly gods and so on from the six realms of desire and the seventeen realms of pure form and the four realms of formlessness, often referred to in Buddhist literature as the long lived gods, those beings on other planets with extraordinary qualities of body and mind and Spirit.

And we finish the meditation by just resting in the sense that that quality has been aroused, that quality is being aroused, that healing is taking place by means of this sacred blue, light blue radiant Omarani Jivantaya Soha.

So does anyone have any points of question or doubt or was my explanation so right on the point so articulately expressed that there is complete clarity in the practice?

Is it on?

Okay.

Could you explain a little bit about the vase Breath?

I haven't really done it for a long time, or if ever.

Of the eight completion stage yogas, the vase breath is listed as one of them, one of the eight, and it's common to all the highest yoga tantras.

So basically all breathing happens with the nose.

Through the nose, no air passes through the mouth.

And as usually said, one sits in the seven or eight point posture of Vairochana, body straight, arms out, shoulders erect, head, and then one breathes in fully.

The air is in as deeply as one can bring it.

One rolls down often.

You can swallow.

That'll flip the abdomen into the right posture.

How you want it to push down, it gives you.

When you're learning it, you go.

And when you swallow, you naturally, the upper abdomen naturally moves into the right position for the vase breathing.

And as you push down and then you pull up with the muscles of the pelvic floor and you hold the breath as long as it's comfortable, but should be between 30 and 45 seconds is what one should aim at as a beginner.

So at the beginning, after one or two breaths, you may find yourself becoming slightly exhausted and so slightly like out of breath.

So you can just rest and relax and breathe in and out deeply a few times.

So as you hold it, your muscles are locked and when you get ready to release, first gently unlock the muscles and then breathe out slowly through the nostrils and have a sense of the energy kind of rising in the body and coming up the central channel.

So in the six yogas of Naropa and six yogas of Nigma, one learns the vase breathing from the very beginning.

In this system, it's not used so much for the practice that we just did, at least on a beginning level.

One simply breathes as normal looks at the red amitayas in one's navel chakra and at the vas in his hands and goes, om Amamarani Jeevantayas.

Omarani Jeevantayas.

Om Amamarani ji.

Lights go out and fill the bring back the essence of the four elements and it overflows and flows into the navel chakra completely heals it.

Then one can just kind of hold the breath there without doing much of a vase exercise.

Then with the next breath, with the next round goes out.

Omarani Jeevantayas.

Omarani Jeevantayas, Omrani Jeevantayasa.

Oha.

And we just sort of hold the breath but not pressing hard like in the vase breath.

And it comes up to the heart chakra and flows into the heart chakra, healing the female elements in the heart chakra, the female koala essence and the four elements.

And then the third Amamarani, Jivan, taisamarani, Jeevan, Taisa, Vanaya vana.

And it overflows and comes up to the heart, the throat chakra and flows into the 16 petal channels.

And we hold the breath just for a little bit.

And then the same for Omamarani jivantayasamaran comes up to the crown chakra and then heals the 32 channel petals in the crown chakra and especially the four elements and the female quality.

And then do it in reverse for the white coming down.

The second completion stage.

Practice is taught in the order they're taught is you start on the out breath.

So you take a breath and on the out breath, red, you turn the mind towards the.

I find it a little bit difficult to do.

You turn the mind to the vase and the red amitayas.

Hands in the navel.

And as you breathe out, red overflows.

Then as you breathe in, in the white channel in the crown white overflows.

As you breathe out, the red rises from navel chakra to heart chakra.

As you breathe in, the white descends from crown chakra to throat chakra.

As you breathe out, it flows into the energy channels of the heart chakra.

As you breathe in, it flows into the 16 channels at the heart chakra.

As you breathe out, it rises up.

As you breathe in, the white moves down.

As you breathe out, the red flows in the navel chakra.

As you breathe in, it flows through the heart chakra.

As the white flows through the heart chakra, as you breathe out, it rises to the crown chakra.

As you breathe in, the white descends to the navel chakra.

As you breathe out, the red diffuses the red through the 32 Chettle panels.

As you breathe in, the white flows into the 64 navel petal channels at the navel chakra.

Should we try that one?

Do that first thing of the morning.

What?

Do it first thing of the morning.

Usually they say with completion stage, it's good to do it in the evening, but we'll give it a crack in the morning.

I will.

But it's an amazing exercise in how it's kind of hard to do this kind of thing.

It's kind of like trying to do that.

Your mind is moving between the white and the red.

Going up, fusing, going down, fusing, going up, fusing, going up.

The point of it is that it raises the female energy from the navel channel and then brings the white male down from the crown chakra.

And in each case, one begins with the female to increase the pleasure, the harmony and the radiance, but then brings in the male to diffuse that.

And the point of it is that you heal the male and female elements in each of the four chakras and bring them to the state of pristine perfection.

Like peoples like you, Stephanie, who have lived lowly, lascivious lifestyles, in whom the white and red drops are greatly damaged through dubious living.

It restores the pristine quality of the male and female drops in the four principal channels.

And it also prepares for what's called in Tantra, the arousing of the four blisses, the downward showering bliss and the upward rising bliss.

And so it sort of acts as a precursor to that practice.

So we'll go back then.

We'll go back to the generation stage, the first stage, when the visualization and the mantra and use of color therapy, and this time we're going to do healing the beyond the world quality.

And we'll go into that in greater depth tomorrow morning.

But just to sort of introduce it at this point.

And as with the worldly qualities, again, we first send out white light.

And this white light is to heal our compassion.

And not having great compassion is considered to be a kind of a sickness.

So we send out white light from.

We turn the head to the Amitias on our head, to the vase in his hands, the mandala in the vase, the Amitias at the center of that mandala in his hands, a vase.

In that vase, the Sil bahri, a little red fire sends out white light and fills the whole universe and pulls back the essence of compassion of all enlightened beings, past, present and future, of 10 directions.

And they come back in the forms of Avalokiteshvara, the Shenrez, the Buddha of Compassion, or Kuan Yin in the Chinese tradition, or Konan, I think in Japanese also, the symbols of compassion held by the various forms of Shanrizi, like the wish fulfilling jewel, many wish fulfilling jewels flow into the vase.

Cittamani is The Sanskrit name compassion's like a wish fulfilling jewel.

When we have compassion, we immediately feel like better human beings.

Without compassion, we feel like not so great human beings.

And when we have compassion, other people feel more comfortable and relaxed around us.

When we don't have compassion, other people feel a little uneasy and careful around us, guarded around us, other things.

Representing compassion is the Lotus, the White Lotus held by Shanrezi, another name for Shanri's holder of the White Lotus.

It's also a name, therefore, for Dalai Lamas Bema Carpo and Crystal Malas, Crystal Rosaries.

Shinrazi is always reciting Om Mani Padmi Hung, then syllables of the Omni Padmi Hung mantra, as well as other forms of the Shenrezi mantra like Namo Lokeshvara.

And these all flow into the vase and melt.

And it's like millions and millions, like a river of it, a great thundering river, like Niagara Falls flows into the vase of all of the power of compassion of the universe.

And it overflows and flows into our body, completely fills our body.

And natural universal compassion, the great compassion of the Bodhisattva, is completely healed within us.

So we become as compassionate Asvara, as compassionate as the Dalai Lama or Buddha or Christ or any other great being.

And then when we finish doing the mantra, we just sit silently and see our body filled with this white radiance and generate the sense that indeed the wisdom of immortality, as represented by the power of compassion, is completely accomplished or attained.

Omarani Jeevantaya soha O Mamarani Jeevantayas Omarani Jeevantaya soha Omarani Jivantayaso Omamarani Jivantayasoha Omamarani Jeevantaye.

So, ha.

So secondly, we send out red light and sort of sunset, red, orange, red, the color of Buddha, Manjushri, the Buddha of wisdom.

And it pulls back all of the wisdom of all the enlightened beings, past, present and future of the ten directions.

And they come in forms of Manjushri Bodhisattva.

The Bodhisattva, symbolizing or embodying wisdom also comes as vowels and consonants of the Sanskrit Alphabet.

Aa, E, E, oo, re, re, lili, lili, and so on.

Or we can just say A, B, C. All the books of wisdom that have ever been written are throughout time and place of all the world systems all come and dissolve into the vase.

All the symbols held by Manjushri, like the sword of Wisdom, that just like a sword cuts out the root of a tree, that we're digging up or a poison plant.

In the same way, the wisdom of the infinity of things and the appearing nature and the interconnectedness of things totally uproots the poisonous tree of ignorance, not knowing, not understanding what's going on.

And also other symbols of Manjushri all come into the skullcup and all come into the vase, and it overflows.

And the overflow comes as red light and down into our body completely infuses our body with a ruby red light, kind of a sunset ish red, and heals all ignorance.

And unknowing completely arouses universal wisdom within us.

Also the syllables of the Manjushri mantra, Omarapatsa nadhi and the longer mantra Namma menju gosha and so forth.

All of these flow into the vase, overflow fil us and wisdom is completely aroused and activated.

And our wisdom becomes as strong, as radiant as the most wise.

We make Solomon seem a little dull.

Wisdom becomes so great.

Oh, there goes Solomon, that dullard.

We used to think he was wise till Eric came along and he outshone him with his wisdom so much that in comparison he's a bit of a dullard.

Oh, mama rani jeevan tayas Omarani, Jeevan tayas Omarani jeevan tayas.

Sam.

And thirdly, lapis luzulai Light go out from the turn our attention to Amitias.

Above the crown of our head and in these hands the vase.

And in the center of the vase the mandala of Amitias.

And in the center of that mandala a small Amitias.

In his hands a vase and a vase silba ri, like a little red flame, sends out lights and sends out lapis lusa line light, which fills the whole universe and brings back the essence of the power, the confidence, the competence and the abilities of all enlightened beings.

Past, present, future of the ten directions, and particularly come in the form of Vajrapani Buddhas Buddha Vajrapani, the Buddha representing the power or strength or ability of all.

The Buddha's past, present and future, also comes in forms of the Vajrapani mantra, Om Vajra pani hum om Om Vajapani hung.

And the implements held by Vajrapani, such as the Vajra, representing the fivefold wisdom, which is able to have primordial clarity, relaxation and joy in the face of any adverse condition, is always able to respond to every challenge with indestructible wisdom, indestructible self awareness, spontaneous lungi tribba, spontaneous awareness of the perfect solution to every situation.

Other implements held by Vajrapani are the lasso, which is a representative meditative power, the power of deep meditation.

When we can keep the mind perfectly focused and perfectly aware, then our power is greatly strength, our competence is greatly strength.

How do we lose power if our mindfulness, our satipatthana practice, becomes weak?

We don't know what's going on, we're going down the street and meanwhile a car is veering towards us out of control.

But our mind isn't on our driving, it's on thinking about something, about, I don't know, maybe Donald Trump in the debate.

What a brilliant point he made there.

What an absolutely genius statement he made.

There.

Or the other, taking the reverse effect, the reverse take on whatever he said or did and suddenly crash, the car blasts into us because our mind was not focused.

So the lasso represents the ability to always keep our mind in perfect focus.

Focus.

Vajrapani is often thought to be shown in the form of a ferocious warrior.

So we should be like a great samurai or a great warrior with total presence of mind, able to respond to any adversity or any attack on any front at any moment.

And in this way all of these things flow into the vase and overflow.

And the overflow of blue light fills our body and completely arouses the sense of strength, competence, ability, the ability or competence to solve any problem that ever comes, to always be perfectly present like a great warrior or warrioress in the middle of this life journey in which we find ourselves and always able to deal with every challenge, every situation by means of the Vajra, the five Vajra wisdoms.

Omarani Jeevantayaso Mamrani, Jeevan Thayas, Omarani, Jeevan Tayas Omarani Jeevan Tayasoa Omarani Jeevantayasoa Om Amarani Jeevan Tayasoa Om Amarani Jeevantayas Om Amarani Jeevan Tayas Om Amarani Jivan Taye Soha.

So in this way we do the healing of our compassion, the healing of our wisdom and the healing of our power by means of reliance or absorbing the blessings and the qualities of the beyond the world, powerful ones.

In other words, the forces of enlightenment itself, the Buddhas and liberated Bodhisattvas.

So Those are the first three of the four generation stage or first stage of the healing practices.

And those are 1, 2, 3, 4 of the completion stage.

Yogas have been introduced.

Although we'll leave the rising and falling one till tomorrow morning.

And let's do a little Vajrasattva mantra.

To conclude today on Vajrasattva, Hungary, and we think any kind of way of listening, way of practicing and so on.

Today, negative thoughts in any way come and going.

Like if you yawned during any of the lectures, yawning at a dharma talk is very rude.

If anyone yawned, you have to do a bhaja Satva mantra.

I'm just teasing, but it's true in the Buddhist world, you're not allowed to yawn, even though sometimes you may feel like it.

So all professional Buddhist lecture attendees learn how to yawn without anyone knowing they're yawning.

You're going to go, because we yawn basically because we need a little bit more oxygen.

That's a way of the body telling you to take more oxygen.

But when one person yawns, it makes another person yawn.

It also looks very funny.

You know, the teacher sitting there teaching, someone almost knocked myself out.

And of course it's very, you know, sometimes at long discourses and particularly like in India, say in Baghaya, it gets very warm in the afternoon.

The Dalai Lama is giving like a four hour discourse and it's first in Tibetan and then a little bit in translation and all that.

And the sun's shining down on you.

The temptation to yawn is always there.

But if anyone yawns, Dalama usually looks.

Like.

Gives a second look.

It's like Somba Home visits of a Samayamana Pali bunza Saba tenor Adrito membo.

Thank you all very much.

Kiepanyamba mehba Yonkone kondu belwar.

So by any positive energy generated through our gathering here, may we move a little bit closer to enlightenment or even achieve complete enlightenment itself right here, now, on the spot, and in that way be of greater benefit in the world and whatever bodhicitta or enlightened wisdom, universal wisdom and universal love, compassion is born within me, although that's very great nonetheless, may it grow from high to higher.

---

## PART 5
*Source: 05_Glenn Mullin - Healing through Meditation Mantra and Color Thera-02.txt*

Saran. So yesterday we completed seven of the eight generation stage meditations associated with Amitayas. First being, sending our light and bringing back the essence of whatever life force has been lost through negative interactions with others.

We see our body in ordinary form on our head Amitayas Buddha in his hands of vase of longevity, in that the complete mandala of Amitayas. At the center of that mandala, a small amitias, in his hands a vase.

And at the center of that, the silba Rhee, looking like a little red flame, sends out lights and pulls back the essence of all life force and vitality that was lost or damaged because of negative interactions with others.

And then we recite the mantra as we do that contemplation, Oma MRNA ji vantaye soha.

The life force comes back, enters the vase, the vase overflows, it fills us and completely heals all scarring and all damage from those negative exchanges in terms of retaining our personal well being, our personal state of inner freedom, relaxation, happiness and joy.

The very important Buddhist practice is meditation on emptiness. In the Lojong tradition, it said of all the hundreds and hundreds of protector deities, guardian angels and dharmapalas, emptiness is the best protector.

And the reason for that is that we give things a particular status in our mind and they take on that status because of the status we give them. All things are mingtang, tokbe, takbar, taksam. All things are merely the labels and projections that we put upon them.

Things from their own side have very little to do with that. I remember a story in China. The man who won the lottery and got so excited and he had a heart attack and died. And the next day his family looked at the lotto ticket and in fact he had misread one of the numbers and didn't win.

We meet someone and we fall madly in love. And they're like the most wonderful, precious creatures on the planet. And then something goes wrong and suddenly they're like the worst possible torturer. But in fact it's the same person, the same being. Nothing much has changed.

That's just that the names and labels and projections we had put there didn't fit. Sometimes to irritate Stephanie, I like to mention the story of Yeshe Sagyal traveling to India and was attacked by seven bandits who raped her repeatedly for some days.

And she sang vajra songs and was totally relaxed and undisturbed. And those seven were so impressed by her calm and cool, they went on to become her first seven disciples.

And two of them in fact were listed Amongst beings who achieved very, very high spiritual states in that life because of how we project on things, very much affect not only the impact that those things have on us but also how we affect that event instead.

Has she projected elsewise evil beings, horrible. What is that expression? Male chauvinist pigs out of control. In all probability they would have felt vindicated in their act of aggression, ungentlemanly behavior.

But instead, because she was totally relaxed and undisturbed, saw them merely as projections of her own karma and her own mind and remained completely in her control of her mental, emotional, spiritual state, it completely transformed not only her experience but the manner in which they experienced her.

So I think this first practice is talking a little bit about that. Whenever we from this life, throughout our life, all negative, unpleasant experiences have some kind of a damaging effect on us. But because of the damaging effect on us, it also causes us to have damaging effects on those beings.

We see very clearly with animals that are very, live very much certain kinds of animals that live very deeply on a kind of emotional level. Like dogs. If we're afraid of a dog, a dog becomes very nervous around us and thinks we must be a criminal, otherwise why would we be nervous around them?

Must be someone that knows that they should be bitten, otherwise why would we be afraid that we're going to be bitten? And it excites the dog, doesn't it?

In that same way, if we have a relaxed mind around that animal, the animal feels, well, he's obviously a very relaxed person, he must be a good person. There's no reason to bark and bite and jump up and down and threaten to misbehave.

So with this first practice, as I mentioned yesterday, in some ways it's learning to forgive others for all the things that we didn't like that happened to us in this lifetime.

And on the other hand also learning to forgive ourselves for our misdirected responses or responses that were unguided by, by wisdom. This emptiness factor, what does it mean really? It means that a thing is given a value by our own conditioning.

Therefore Nagarjuna says there is no good, there is no bad. Good and bad are only contextual to more good or more bad. Like if someone robs a million dollars for you, you'll think that's very bad.

But if they come to your house and there's a penny on the table and they pick it up and take it, you don't think it's so bad. But actually both are in the same direction, aren't they? We only ascribe A different value.

And sometimes things that we think are good turn out to be bad, and things that we think are bad turn out to be good. I remember the first time I went to a dentist, I thought very bad, but it had some kind of good about it. And similarly, the first time I went to a doctor, Needles. Ouch. Ouch.

And these things are all. The emptiness factor is just referring to all things are empty of true existence. The manner in which we experience things do not exist in the manner of their appearance. So when I was in Ottawa, I mentioned a movie from the 50s called the Scarlet Pimpernel.

And Dan wrote me, what was that movie you mentioned with the first name? Red. Something red. Scarlet Pimpernel is not Red. He's the Scarlet Pimpernel. And in it, he plays the role of a British gentleman that in public pretends to be sort of afraid of the war, and very timid and very almost cowardly.

And secretly he takes boats to France and goes in and rescues Jewish and French artists and noteworthy intellectuals. And so to all of the ordinary people, he is a scoundrel, a cowardly scoundrel, avoiding the war. And in their mind, that's how he exists.

And in that same way as his brother, the second Dalai Lama, puts it in a poem, you go through a mountain pass and you see a tree stump and you think it's a bandit, a robber.

No matter how much you look in the tree trunk or the boulder that you think is a robber, you don't find a robber, you don't find a bandit. Things, the way they appear in our mind are just how they appear in our mind. But we take that appearance to be the real thing.

So I think the first part of the forgiveness process begins by understanding this strong sense of duality. Me, other, self, subject, object. This is certainly like this. That is certainly like that begins with a relaxation, that way of processing. And then we did the healing of the elements.

The vase in our amitayas in our head, and the five, the vase in his hands. And inside that vase, the complete mandala of amitayas. And inside the that mandala, little Amitias. And in his hands, a tiny little vase the size of a sesame seed.

And inside that, the flame of Hri, red letter Ri, sends out first golden lights and then white lights, then red lights, then green lights for earth, water, fire and air elements, and brings back those essences.

Earth in the form of mountains and boulders and great earthquakes, and water in the form of oceans and seas and lakes and rivers and great floods and Fire in terms of sun and stars and great conflagrations, air as hurricanes or tornadoes and great windstorms, and they overflow and fill our body and cure first the coarse body, from the solid bones and flesh to the blood and lymph systems, to the metabolism and then to the respiratory system and within each cell, the solid factor and the moisture factor and the motility factor and the temperate factor, and then with blue, bringing a balance of those elements both in the coarse body and in the cellular level, and sometimes linking that to the emotional body, healing our anger and healing our arrogance and healing our self centeredness, healing our prides and jealousies, and finally healing our apathy and lassitude and laziness.

And at the end of each of those five, resting in that for a few moments with a sense of total wellness, total healedness. In conjunction with that, we did two of the completion stage yogas from the Hayagriva Tantra.

The first, we put a blue Amitayas at the heart chakra, a red at the throat chakra, a white in the crown chakra, yellow in the navel chakra, and green in the root chakra or sacred chakra. Good morning. Good morning. Good morning. How does that Beatles song goes?

So we put the five Buddhas in the five chakras. And then for sending out, we send light first from the heart, blue light. And within the body, it heals all illnesses to do with the Klesha of lassitude, lack of focus, laziness, the kind of.

When water sits in one place, it becomes rotten, it becomes contaminated. Moving, flowing water stays clean and healthy. In that same way, laziness and latitude create problems in body, emotion and mind. So within the body heals all of the illnesses connected to, as it's often said, ignorance.

But ignorance in English is a totally different meaning than the literal translation, I think. Isn't it like we would say Hillary Clinton is kind of. Was it ignorant? Oh, no, that's Donald Trump. That's Donald Trump.

We'll use the word ignorant about someone who's actually quite educated and very wise and has a very. It just means someone who holds attitudes that we don't like. In English, very often we'll say someone's an idiot or a moron or ignorant if they think the world is other than we are.

They hold different political views or worldviews or value systems. In the Buddhist world, ignorance literally means mishapa, means not knowing. It can also mean wrong knowing, but more often it just means not knowing. And that of the 84,000 klesha or mental distortions.

One fifth of them fall under that category, but largely manifests here in terms of laziness, latitude, lack of focus, lack of direction. And that kind of energy is not healthy. It's like water sitting in one place, not moving, not flowing. And it doesn't help with our health and well being.

Contributes to, as it's said in Tibetan, its share of the 404 types of illnesses. And the blue light then goes out through the pores of our body and forms that little blue shield like a rainbow light shield.

Someone was saying, when I do that, should I think it feels heavy, like heavy armor, but it's like a radiance, like a rainbow force field. And then from the throat the red light goes out and fills our body from the red amitias of the throat chakra.

And within the body all illnesses and sources of illness, all unhappiness and source of unhappiness, discontent, anxiety and stress associated with the desire, attachment, craving, longing, a sense that things aren't good enough. And this kind of. It's a very unpleasant feeling, isn't it?

I need this or I need that. One of the great wonders is that any given moment we have a hundred million little things in our life and those will suddenly become totally obscured and we think about the one or two little things we don't have that we want.

And again, it's an anxiety, it's a stress, and it's a doorway to its Share of the 404 Types of Illnesses as well as that, of course it attracts and inspires certain negative conditions, doesn't it?

That in turn inspires certain negative activities, that in turn brings negative karma, negative hair, meaning distorted. And then so it fills the body, overflows, heals. That Share of the 404 Types of Illnesses purifies all negative karma created by a mind of longing, desire, attachment.

Buddha, an image I like from one of the Buddhist teachings. He says desire is like a drop of oil on a piece of paper. And at first it's just a tiny little drop, but if you look a few hours later, it's kind of spread through the whole paper. And longing is like that.

At first it's just a little thing and then it becomes bigger and bigger and bigger and then it becomes like an obsession, fills our whole world. I don't know if you ever saw the Steve Martin film the Lonely Guy. Very cute comedy. His girlfriend leaves him and he's very lonely.

And it's a small thing, your girlfriend or boyfriend leaving you. That's like, big deal, right?

You've still got the whole universe, but somehow that whole universe disappears and you think about that one little thing that is no longer part of your life or part of your world, and your whole world crumbles.

As a traveling dharma teacher, meditation teacher, Buddhist teacher, I get a lot of people come to me with questions like, oh, my girlfriend left me. How can I get her back? Or my boyfriend left me. How can I get him back?

What do you say?

What?

What do you say?

Yes, Yes. I usually say, well, if I were you, I'd try 30 or 40 others first. Take them for test runs, then compare them and see how he measures up and see if you really want him back or if you want to trade up.

Of course, it's different if people are married, have kids and have a, you know, that kind of thing. But usually these things are, you know, they've been playing house for a year or two or three, and it's more of an emotional, intellectual kind of addiction than it is anything else.

I think there is something to be said for trading up, especially if it's driving you crazy. I mean, you actually, you know, it's a common cause of suicide in the West.

One reason I did the book the Female Buddhas is because I think in the west, we think we understand relationships and sexuality very well, but still we have people like drinking poisons, jumping off cliffs and in front of subways and hanging themselves and shooting themselves.

So attachment, we think, and longing, craving. This feeling of my life is inadequate as is. It's a cause of unhappiness immediately in the long run, opens a doorway to its 1/5 share of diseases and problems, and of course, inspires considerable negative karma.

All the way from murder and stalking to revenge to doing lots of crazy things to get above or beyond or whatever. So back to the emptiness factor. In the Buddhist world, the first thing one does is meditate on the emptiness factor. How that being is not what they appear to be.

One makes that image in one's own mind. And of course, if one really wants a relationship, one should pursue it. As my great great, great, great, great, great great great great grandfather, Sir Francis Bacon, who wrote the Shakespeare plays, put it, faint heart and narrow, one fair lady.

So if one is determined, one feels that really is a very important thing. But it should be way should be. That decision should be made based on wisdom, not on attachment, fear of loss and all of the negative mind frames. Then, of course, it's easy.

You just have to, like, sit beside the road and pretend that you're just there when she walks by, oh, I have these flowers. And the next day, oh, gosh, I found this, like thousand dollars just lying on the road. What should I do with it?

I'm like, afraid to hold it because I'm a bit of a greedy person. Maybe you could hold it for me. Then we can decide what to do and a bunch of little things like that. I have a whole, what I call arsenal of advice I give to young men and women in such a position.

And I think it is a sort of a subtle question. What is desire, attachment, and what is inspiration and vision? When one wants to do something, one has a particular idea or a passion to do something. Is it desire and attachment or is it inspiration and vision?

But I think sitting quietly and just observing the relationship between one's own mind and that subject or that object clarifies, doesn't it can make it become quite clear what it is of its inspiration and vision, or of its silly obsession and craving and longing.

Then thirdly, from the crown chakra, lights go out, fill one's body and totally eradicate all causes of illness, unhappiness, distortion and negative karma. Instincts of negative karma created by anger, irritation and so forth. Anger, irritation, aversion, and they're opposites.

Things like fear, dread, trepidation, and then flows out through the pores of one's body and forms a force field outside of the room.

Red and again, in Tibetan medicine, when we sit in anger, anger releases particular kinds of chemicals in the body, both from the brain and from the adrenals, from the pancreas. And these chemicals are natural, and in the right time and the right place, they help us.

Like, you know, if an elephant charges us, we get that same chemistry. First fair and then a kind of a, hey, better take care of this. The adrenaline and the brain chemistry all give us a heightened sense of time. Like a second becomes like a minute in our mind.

It transforms the way consciousness deals with time. It totally transforms our movement and response mechanism, Often almost doubles our physical strength. In that way, it's healthy.

But when it's not a charging elephant or something going on which needs such attention, it's just Jim Blake at the office insulted me over the water cooler or such, and such a person wronged me in such a way. And most angers are over such things.

Very few angers are about things that need immediate attention. They're really long drawn out, festering sores in our relationship with someone or something.

The American television channel called the Learning Channel, mostly shows, cop shows, and it's very often about Funny relationships between neighbors. Someone puts up a light and someone else doesn't like it and asks them to put it down. And then that starts a big feud.

And 10 years later they're like letting air out of each other's cars in supermarkets and stuff like that.

So again, one fifth of all of the 404 types of illnesses comes from, you could say, an overdose of the brain and adrenal chemicals that are released in times of the need for a ferocious reaction.

But usually that kind of reaction, the energies we get from those chemicals usually are 5, 10, 20 seconds, 30 seconds long. Then that event is solved, that calamity is over and done with.

And hopefully the chemistry we got that gave us the power and the speed and the alertness to be victorious has successfully done its job. But anger, irritation, aversion aren't like that. They sit there for hours and days and weeks and sometimes even years.

Feuds between brothers and sisters and neighbors and ex husbands and ex wives and ex boyfriends and ex girlfriends and so on, giving rise to not only its share of the 404 types of illnesses, but also to negative karma of thought, negative karma of speech, negative karma of action.

One sits thinking anger, angersome, irritable, irritated thoughts. And that's an energy, that's a karma. Then the subject comes up, how is your ex husband, blah, blah blah, doing? Oh, thank goodness, he's dying of cancer.

He was doing very, very well, but just yesterday I heard he was hit by a truck.

And in that way it spreads into our life and affects us not only our ordinary health, our inner peace totally devastates spiritually, creates energy patterns and karmic patterns that undermine the success of our own life.

So the white light fills the body and totally heals all of that and then flows out through the pores and forms a little rainbow film of white light outside of the red.

And by means of that whatever residual patterns are out there connected to those angry, irritable, aversion driven syndromes are unable to re enter or to reactivate us in that same way. Then we come down to the navel chakra and golden light and send it out.

And that fills our body and completely within the body our sense of narcissism or self centeredness. Sort of often it's called the word intimate is also serg is often used, means kind of a miserliness, our hoarding, hoarding, our hoarding factor.

And sometimes nagyal is associated with pride, self centeredness, sort of egoism. And the 1/5 share of the 404 types of illnesses and causes of illness in our body are healed.

And within the emotional framework, all disturbances and unhappinesses associated with those kinds of emotions are clarified. All karmic seeds associated with negative thoughts, negative words, negative deeds based on pride, based on narcissism and so on, are washed away.

And the golden light flows out through the pores and forms a filament outside of the white. And finally with the secret chakra or the root chakra, the green amitias. And his hands are the longevity vase. And in that vase a complete mandala. And in that mandala at the center, a little amitayas.

And in the amitayas, in his hands a vase.

And in that vase the hri sends out lights green, emerald green, fills the body and totally heals all illnesses, cause all of the its share of 404 illnesses caused by the disbalancing factor of jealousy envy, and heals the mind of the unhappiness created by jealousy and envy.

And then washes away all negative karmic instincts created by acts of body, speech and mind that are driven by jealousy envy. And then the light flows out through the pores and makes a little filament outside of the golden.

So we do this as a completion stage yoga in connection with five elemental healings from the generation stage yoga. So let's do each of those five. We can do them with or without vase breathing. You can do them with legs crossed, or you can put your hands on your thighs like that.

I like my fingers open. When I was younger and skinnier, I'd feel my fingers like that. But now that I'm older and chubbier and more handsome, I let my fingers open first. You start with the heart chakra.

After you do it as a vase breath, you take the vase breath and hold it at the navel chakra and turn the mind to the heart chakra, the blue amitayas, the vase in his hands and the mandala and the vase, little amitayas at the center of that vase and send out lights, fill your body with blue lapis lusulae light and do that level of healing.

Now, if you don't like to do it with the vase breathing, just breathe very deeply, very slowly. And as you breathe, it's as though the breath is going like each of those is one mantra sound like O mah marani jinta yeso ha. As though the reverberating sound of the breath is the mantra.

The breath resounds with the melody or the music, the rhythmic sound of the madra omara ni. And flowing out through the pores forms that filament of blue through which even the most dramatic of weapons and negative energies and negative thoughts cannot penetrate.

Then from the throat chakra with the red amitayas, it's then the red flows out through the pores and forms a rainbow filament and armor filament, filament outside of the blue. Then we turn the attention to the white amitias in the crown chakra. Fills the body with white light.

The white lights flow out through the pores and form a white filament outside the red. Then, coming to the navel chakra, yellow. The yellow light emanates out and fills the body. So the yellow flows out through the pores and forms a protective filament outside of the white.

Then we turn our mind to the green amitayas in the root chakra and emanates emerald green light. Omamarani, Zintaya, Yesoha. So these can also be associated with the five elements, the five Buddha families.

And as with the other generation completion stage yogas, with what's called the five constituent, the 25 constituents, which is five skandhas, five elements, five buddhas, five kleshas, five wisdoms.

Each time the healing begins in the body with that faction of illness or causes of illness associated with how that klesha activates a negative energy that puts the elements of the body into disbalance. The humors of the body, Lung, tripa, pagan, as they're called in Tibetan. The three bodily.

My humor sounds like a funny word in English. I don't know. What do you say, Eric, for the three? What. What do you use if you happen to use that in conversation? Humors aren't very humorous. Wind, bile and phlegm. When the four elements in space, the five factors combine in particular ways.

They come down to these three. Fiery, watery and windy, with the earth pervading all of them. Yeah.

What are we thinking about when we're thinking about the colors? Like the clashes that are being cleansed, building.

Say that again.

What are we visualizing when we're thinking of the colors? The glaciers that we're cleaning and we're not going out anymore. That was the generation stage, right?

Right, Correct.

So we're just thinking of.

So this is completion stage. It all happens inside and it's the completion stage. Yoga, known as the Yoga of Donning Protective Armor. But if you put on a set of armor, you have to be sure that whatever it is you're keeping outside isn't already inside.

So first you expel from inside whatever it is that's being kept out. So it's a little bit. I don't know. You remember the John Travolta movie phenomena where he gets a brain tumor and suddenly he goes from ordinary intelligence to super intelligence.

He can never figure out how the rabbit is eating his lettuces, even though he put up a fence. And then he figured out, oh, it's living under the house.

But are we thinking of virtues that we're building with the colors that are associated with the colors?

Yeah, I mean, each of those, as I mentioned, is associated with the 25 factors, the 25 constituents, as they're called.

And I suppose if we look at this as a metaphoric process, then we'd say if you have the mirror, like wisdom, it protects from illness and harms and negative karma in this such and such a way.

If you have the wisdom of equal equality of all things, it protects us from illnesses and negative karmas and negative activities and this and this way. You could take it that way in a metaphoric sense. But tantra usually doesn't get too much into metaphoric meaning explicitly. Usually it provides.

It presents it as a kind of a mystical theater. And so you sit there with your five rainbow shields and you walk through the IC unit of the hospital to visit your grandma with every kind of bacteria in the hospital as you walk in. And you're unassailable. You are unassailable. Invincible.

Before, we were designating like virtues to some of those colors that we wanted to. But we're not thinking about this.

No. First healing of kicking out, expelling, exercising, diseases and then causes of diseases and then karmic patterns and karmic seeds. Like that.

Thank you.

Why don't you hold the microphone, Barbara? She's got a bad knee.

No, I like doing.

Okay, go ahead then. I enjoy it. Okay.

Do you have a book on the colors or can you recommend one on the colors?

You can just get a copy of this webcast and then they'll have it on dvd. Then you can sit down and take notes. Otherwise you can just remember it.

Provided I remember it rightly. And the second thing was, well, remembering.

Is only remembering rightly. Otherwise it's misremembering.

With computer graphics. Now, are there visual tantric meditations available on the Web?

I don't know. I have to do a search. I haven't seen much that's been done. They started doing something out of Cornell with Lama Pema from Namgyal many, many years ago. But unfortunately, he caught Some kind of illness and passed away.

He managed to complete a kind of a very simple Kalachakra mandala on a very high one. At the time was one of the most high end graphics computers on the planet was at Cornell, and that's out there on the web. But by today's graphic standards, it's extremely simplistic.

It just sort of looks like a little Lego set compared to the graphics they use in Hollywood these days. And even some of the great graphic programs you can get on many of the art platforms. I haven't seen anything that's to do with this, which I'm sort of surprised.

There might be something out there and it's just not publicly shared. Traditionally this kind of practice has been for initiates only. And in the west, obviously we take a bigger interpretation for initiates only.

Like if everyone's been our mother in a previous life, we probably have had every initiation. So a lot of books that weren't publicly sold in Tibet can be purchased or just downloaded from various websites. But it would be a wonderful project to do such a.

To help prepare such a graphic presentation. It would help a lot with say six yogas of Naropa and Nigma, which are very precision presented in the texts.

Of course, when I teach them, I'm such an articulate speaker that it's almost like I'm projecting visually, graphically, as holographically in the air. I mean, one interesting thing is the holographic software that's come out that can be used on many of the software machines.

That one can actually make holographic projections of things. And you could turn it on and see it on a screen out in your living room, sort of thing at the back. Can I wait for the microphone? Thanks.

So when we have our dreams and we're doing dream yoga, you are going to send us cosmograms of.

Yes, lots of cosmograms.

Wonderful. Aerograms.

Air mail.

Air mail.

Rather than email. It'll be Amail or C. Male. Cosmic Male. You know, in the Buddhist world, we think that because of the blessings of Buddhist and bodhisattvas that our teachers, with whom we have close karmic relationships often do appear to us just in our thoughts and in our dreams.

And when we have pressing issues, we'll answer and say things and do things that. For instance, I've mentioned in the past a friend of mine dying in Toronto, Tibetan for the last three days of his life, he hallucinogenically experienced the Dalai Lama visiting him almost constantly.

And this one, very ordinary Monk was in town and went in to say hello, and he looks nothing like the Dalai Lama. I walked in, and Tashi sort of sits up in his dying bed and said, oh, Gyawa Rinpoche. Like, Dalai Lama Gyawarinpoche. I didn't think you would actually come in person.

And he went on for, like, 15 minutes, like, as though this was really the Dalai Lama directly there. And in his mind, he just kept experiencing visitations like that. And it's not through the power of the particular master that that's done. I think it's rather.

It's the blessing of the tradition, because it happens with very ordinary teachers, not just Dalai Lamas. Like, almost everyone will have visitations from their teachers on multiple occasions when particular things are going on in their life.

And the teachers will give wise advice, sometimes say silly things, and then a year later, oh, that was really very wise. It's just I had a silly mind when I heard it, so I thought it was silly, but really it was very wise.

So the 13th Dalai Lama points that out in a text that when teachers teach with good motivation and listeners listen with good. In other words, when the teachers have the.

Have the positive motivation and the students have positive motivation, the magic and mystery of the emanation powers of Buddhas and bodhisattvas enter into play. So a cosmogram. It's like a brain tweet. People are asking a lot of questions, so I think we'll begin with some questions.

I know that Ivana has one.

Well, first, over here. What's your name? Marie, is it? No, Ursula. That's not a Mexican name.

I know.

I know, I know.

That's why I have had a little bit of difficulty with my. And I research about my ancestry because I don't look Mexican. I feel Mexican. I don't look Mexican. But I have a lot of. I will say I am international. I have all of the world races in my body and my genes, and I like them.

Okay, Ursula, what's your question?

My question? Okay. My question was it's embarrassing. I don't know. It's more. It's very personal. So I didn't mind.

You want to ask or you don't want to?

Some of the chakras. I. I've been working myself in some of the chakras because I felt that there was an imbalance, and we just recently going through difficult times in my life. I felt that for months with meditation and everything. I hold it very well.

And then all of a sudden, some disbalance came into my body. And I just couldn't figure out what was that. And it's about that, that I could see, like, I could feel here just recently, right now I'm better, but I had, like, uncontrollable feeling of, like, crying when I never cry.

Crying. Richard, he meditates and cries a lot so you guys could meditate together.

And I was like, so when I.

Gave him a Buddhist name, I gave him the name Laughing Diamond. Otherwise, you know, there's a very famous bodhisattva in the prajna paramita in 8000 verses called Takhtung, the constant crier. He's always crying. He thinks of his guru and he starts crying.

He hears his gurus going to give a teaching somewhere, and he starts crying. And then he's lying in bed at night and a thought to be screw arises, and he starts crying. I think some people release emotions through crying, and other people through laughing. Other people through celebrating, dancing.

Like, I think Americans, they often like the girls, they often jump up and, like, start going up and down with their feet and going like this with their legs, with their hands. The laughing and crying is kind of very common and energetic release and emotional release.

I like better laughing than crying.

Me too. So I don't bother with the crying business. Though I do cry at romantic movies. Therefore, I never watch romantic movies except in very dark theaters or by myself. Because it's too embarrassing.

Exactly. Well, the idea of this is, what chakras can I work with? Or just let it go and then let it out?

Yeah, I think just let it go, let it out. I think emotional release is very important, and often I think we don't do enough of it as humans. There should be more hugging, more kissing, more laughing, and more crying. That's why you see Stephanie crying all the time. Her friends call her crybaby.

None of my friends do.

Oh, Ilona has one again.

I was wondering if you could possibly go over the. You know, the colors and the chakras and the emotions that, you know, apparently some people are going, hey, so it's not only my question. If we could.

No, no. Everyone understands them. I've said them twice. Once yesterday and once today. That's said twice. So that means everyone has them completely understood. They are burned into your brains like a brand on a wild horse. On the open steps, we will appreciate the tremendously.

Okay, we'll do it when I start. Start talking again. We'll come over here for the next question. At the back first. At the back first.

Pat. When a teacher has the Brahman aperture. And is that really. How common is that in today's practices?

I mean, when you're well, the Brahma aperture is considered. We speak of the body as having nine general apertures, but a tenth, which is the place on your skull, which is a soft spot when you're born. But when you're born, it's at the top of your head.

So even though it then moves to the back of your head, usually back here a little bit as the brain skull sort of goes like this, but when you're born, it's pretty well at the top of the head. So that's what's referred to as a Brahma aperture.

And when you die, it said the best way to leave your body is through the Brahma aperture. If you do so, it very much encourages the positive entering the bardo in a positive mood and a positive consciousness frequency.

And one reason for doing a lot of the Tantric meditation is visualizing your guru on your head, or the Buddha form on your head is it brings the energies to that point and encourages.

If you practice like that during your lifetime, then as you're dying, you'll perhaps think, oh, bring to a crown of my head. You'll do the. You'll revert to your practice.

Very often in Buddhism, it said when the best form of poa is, whatever is your favorite form of Tantric practice, to do that at the time of dying. So for instance, Lama Yeshaya, who is one of my great gurus, when he started dying, knew he was going to die.

He basically called a meeting with his main two or three students, and they did Haruka chakra sambhara self initiation all night. And he passed away just before dawn.

And that's kind of a common way for practitioners to die when you know it's your time going back to your favorite meditation and doing that for what you do at the time of death, rather than any other kind of poa, just do that.

So the Tibetan Book of the Dead, for instance, it says a reading of the Tibetan Book of the Dead helps if you've been practicing the Sitro, the peaceful, wrathful deity mandala during your lifetime. If you haven't been doing that, then the language of the Tibetan bukhadir won't mean much to you.

So the best is as you're dying, the person's dying. If you can do it in your last hours, you call a vajra friend or a very close one of your gurus, and if they chant the practice beside you as you're dying, of that mandala practice.

Then as you go into the Tibetan Book of the Dead Phases, if you will, it'll have the greatest impact. So putting on your head has that kind of effect of bringing your consciousness to that aperture, and in the long run, will help at the moment of death.

And when I gave my Thursday night talk for those of you who didn't come, it's very common to put a red dakini or a white dakini above your head. And the white dakini has her feet up behind her ears. And the red dakini is sort of jumping, doing the splits above your head.

And the birth passage is right above your Brahma aperture. And as you're dying, you would do the six yogas of Naropa or six yogas of Nigma, whichever is your practice. And you'd bring the consciousness up through the central channel and throw it out the Brahma aperture into the womb of the consort.

This painting is a little bit like that, the red dakini for the red transference. But it's a painting about the practice of Chud coming from Macyklabdun, where one visualizes the body dying and leaving the body and doing the Tantric practice outside of the body.

So it's the same kind of idea, putting it above the head and then consciousness. They says if you're a passionate person, you use the red dakini like this one. And if you're more male, male aggression is your stronger quality. Then you'd use the white yogini.

And then going into the womb, everyone has kind of a. Because we're all born from the womb, everyone has a return to the womb, very deep instinct.

Often when people are in a very desperate situation, very sick, they'll sort of put themselves in what's called the fetal position as though they were back in the womb. And very often just doing that will encourage your immunity system to feel in charge of things, and you'll assist with the healing.

So that's used at the time of death. So Brahma Apache just refers to that. I think what you're referring to is sometimes in the paintings, the Buddha bump.

Well, I had a teacher, and he definitely had one. It was very visible. And so really, I wanted to know what percentage.

What do you mean, visible? What was visible? A hole in his head?

No, the bump.

Okay. But the Brahma aperture isn't a bump. The Brahma aperture. Aperture literally means hole. That's Sangpu in Tibetan, means the Brahma hole. The Brahma aperture, the Brahma cave, something like that.

But Sometimes in certain.

So the bump is different. That's in Tibetan, that's called a yushnisha in Sanskrit, or suktor in Tibetan. So some people have that on their crown. And if you look at paintings of the 16 arhants, one or two of them have it quite strongly.

Now it's said that we can have it just as a genetic thing, because some of our ancestors had a gene which made that crown shaped in that way, but at the time of our enlightenment, a kind of energy light. So sometimes you'll see in paintings that rather than a Buddha bump, it'll be like a.

A little flame is up there. So it's said to be one of the hundred and twelve marks of a supreme Nirmanakaya or of a sambhogakaya. But if you look up, try to look at the top of it, you can't see it. So if you're looking at the person's eyes, it looks about this big.

But if you move your eyes up to see the top, it gets bigger. And if you move your eyes to where it goes to the top of the universe.

During my face breathing, sometimes afterwards, I feel like pressure through my back, like my shoulder blades. I didn't know if there's a reason for that or if there's a reason to release that there's a proper way.

Well, you know, when I did the six yogas of Naropa practice before doing the buzz breathing, often they do this stretching. You imagine the vertebrae of the spine to be like a set of coins, one upon the other, but connected, and you twist them and stretch them. So you go one way and then the other.

The other is at the end of doing the six yoga practices you do, shaking the body like it has no head or limbs. And so they jump up and they kind of do a dance, you know, where you throw your arms like this and you go like this. So you totally redirect the flow of the blood through the whole system.

But it is easy. People do sometimes tense through meditation. Someone mentioned to me the other day that just from their meditation, they often get back pain and back tension. And so I think one good thing to do is do a body sweep at the beginning and end of your meditation.

So you start up here, and you just put your mind on the muscles at that area and what's at that area, and just tell them to relax consciously make them relax and very slowly go down the whole body, then come back up the body. So when you finish your six yogas in a ropa, after you do the Shaking.

Like, you have, like, your arms and legs and head are going to fly away. Sit down and just sweep the body and make arms, make all the muscles totally relax again.

And sometimes just sitting in a position, you know, you tense up doing an exercise or a movement and you won't notice it, and it'll just stay there for half an hour or an hour, and then naturally the muscle will feel stressed. Thank you.

I'm getting the colors mixed up from other practices. The root chakra being red, the throat chakra being blue, and Kundalini yoga.

What's important to remember that there are no actual colors to chakras, that these are all connected to specific practices for specific purposes. So when we project a color into something, that color creates a kind of vibration.

The idea is a color has a kind of a vibratory presence to it, a mood or a vibration to it. And so each practice will have its own color approach to the chakra practices, depending on what you're trying to do. So, for instance, in six yogas of Naropa, you really only use white and red.

You don't use many other colors at all. But in this one, as we saw with the Vajra Armor, we're using all five. And in many of the practices, we're using the colors of the five elements. So it's totally dependent upon what is the practice you're doing, what's the purpose of the practice?

It's a little bit like a microwave, I think, or a. What is it? Raiki. Raiki healing. I don't know much about Raiki, but when we do this kind of practice, you could say we're doing a kind of a Raiki healing on our chakras or an energy transformation within that chakra.

And the most common way in the Tantric world is you put white Om in the crown chakra, red ah, at the throat chakra, and blue hung at the heart chakra. If you're only using three, those are the three you use.

So very often when you do guru yoga, you'll see in front of me, I see my guru, the Great Glen Mullen. Looks like if it's a Milarepa practice, in this case it would be Rey Chungba, because it's brought to Tibet by Re Tungba looks like Rey Tungba, but really it's Glenn.

And then at his crown is syllable Omn, white Om. At his throat, syllable red hum, Red ah. At his heart, syllable blue hum.

I pray, O great Glenn, please provide the four empowerments and give the great transforming transmission that brings rapid Enlightenment, having requested that plaintively until tears come to your eyes. White Om comes from his crown. Red ah comes from his throat to your throat.

Blue Hum comes from his heart to your heart. And then he comes over to your head and sinks and becomes the size of a thumb, descends via the Brahma aperture through the central channel to your heart and dissolves into you. The Om gives you the vase initiations. The A gives you the secret initiation.

The Hung gives you the wisdom initiation. And the omahung together give the fourth initiation of direct pointing to the nature of enlightenment. And then he diffuses throughout your body, speech and mind. And your body, speech and mind become one with glenitude. Barely I have achieved glenitude.

So in Tibetan Buddhist world, there's thousands of guru yogas like that. Many Dalai Lamas and Panchen Lamas, their students say, would you write one just for me? And they'll write them like a 10 verse poem which just says, in front of me is my guru.

Kyosong Gyatso, 7th Dalai Lama looks like Milarepa. But really it's if the lineage was from Milarepa lineage, or sometimes it'll be a deity. It looks like Tara, looks like Shanrazi, looks like it can be guru yoga based on a particular tantric mandala deity. But it looks like that.

And nature is in fact my own mind. Because we often say the guru, the teacher is in nature one's own mind. And then there's always a lot of verses. And in Tibetan they put the verses with the name in it, like Kelsong Gyatso. Kel means like auspicious and Zong good, something like that.

Gyatso Gya means big and so means lake for ocean.

So it'll be like for us Kel then us fortunate trainees, then Kel, then Kyozong, who are have these, who have the Zangpo, who have the good karma to meet with that great master Kilan in the vast expanse of the emptiness and bliss for Gya Gya being vast or big, we swim in the oceans of the great vast dharma of sutra and tantra.

So each verse will have Kel sung kya. So if I were to write one for myself, I'd have to use my Buddhist name, Chamba. Zopa Cham means love. So it'd be like to the master, who is of essential nature is love Zopa, and who has the great patience of the wisdom of emptiness.

So like Kelsong Gyatso is better for that kind of poem because Kel has something by itself and Zong has something by itself. And Gya has something by itself, and so has something by itself. But Champa Zoppa has kind of. You only got one meaning from each of the two names.

So the poet has to be better than the Seventh Dalai Lama. It's easy if you got a name like. Like that. So like Richard, his name I gave him is Che Pei Dorje.

So once he achieves enlightenment and he becomes a master teacher and he writes guru yoga poems for his students, it'll be, oh, in front of me looking like. Looking like Buddha Amitayas laughing with the great joy of crying.

And do means stone whose wisdom is as indestructible as the most hardest stone in the universe. And J J means boss or best, and who has achieved the state of chief of all meditators. I request blessings and inspiration. So those kind of poems use like that.

So at the very least, white, red and blue are very often used for just the three in Tantra.

If we go to four for completion, stage practice, and we add one at the navel, and then we can add another one at the secret place, and then we can add one at the top of the skull, and we can add one at the sexual site. So we can make 4, 5, 6, 7. It's kind of normal. Normal way to do.

But whichever system it is we do, we should understand the system as a whole. Which is one reason why it's often said when you receive or attend a discourse on something you don't know anything about or don't know much about, that you shouldn't mix it with yesterday's food while you're listening.

Or it gets all kind of. Well, last time I heard, I attended six yogas of Naropa. And there was no blue and there was no yellow. Goes like that, right? And so you can easily kind of tie all those things in. It just scatters your listening. And then later on you can compare.

Well, in this way, it's like this and this and this way. It's like this and this. So meaning is something like that. We need a microphone over there. You're not allowed to look at your telephone if you're going to be in charge of the microphone.

Pictures of your event for you.

For me? Yeah, for me. I don't know.

Hi. Thank you.

Hello, Ursula.

Okay, my question is, when I was meditating and we went through the colors, it was easy for me to see the red, then the blue, and then.

Purple.

And then I couldn't see it.

There was once a song associated with Chicago. I think the eggplant that ate Chicago. Back in the 50s, they used to have all those, like, B horror movies of Martian invaders. Someone else mentioned yesterday they're seeing a lot of purple. Was that you? Yes.

You see, it's from the eggplant that ate Chicago. It could mean the eggplants are returning. We thought at the end of that movie we had destroyed them all and Chicago was safe. But no, the eggplant is coming back with an army and not those little eggplants like this. This time.

They're really big eggplants. Yeah. I think we have a natural predisposition for colors. And when we get into being with color, we become maybe a little bit more sensitive to it, and we notice more. I've mentioned here before some monasteries in Tibet, some hermitages, for doing these practices.

Often they would do them as retreat over the period of a month or two months. So you wouldn't just do all in one set. I mean, you would, if you did it as a day practice, what they call a nyntun in Tibetan, which is.

Some monasteries would have what they call a nyntun, which means a daily practice with a. As a group. And some of them also had what they called a trubchen, which means the great practice. But it's only 10 days. It's not that great.

But usually it's great because it's done in a great place and it's done with a great master. So often the troopchants, the 10 day ones in the Tibetan tradition, they'll do them at, like, a place where, you know, Guru Rinpoche achieved enlightenment or Milarepa did something.

It'll be one of the very great pilgrimage spots. And they're due for 10 days. But if you did it as a month or six weeks or two months, then when you were doing the color white, they'd put you in a little hut, and all the walls are white, and the windows kind of have a white curtain over them.

So the whole thing is white. And all you experience is white. And maybe for a day or two days or three days or even a week, you'll only be in white. And then you'll finish with the white, and then you'll go to another color.

So you'll go through the five colors in five different huts and only experience those five colors for that time of that practice.

So it's just about practice. That's what you mean. What is that? Only about practice? That with time it will come or.

I think, you know, I think with visualization, anyway, familiarity helps a lot. Doing as a Daily practice becomes very easy. It's like if you only go out on a blind date once and you go with that fellow or that lady to a dark cafe where you don't really see their face very well.

Then when you go home and make love, you don't really turn the lights up very much. The next day you can't remember their face so well. But then you marry them, it becomes very easy to remember their face, every detail. Okay.

Yeah.

Okay. Okay. So someone asked about. Oh, yeah. Okay, go ahead.

No, it's you.

I've seen Sadhanas and have heard mention of the, the white, the om being.

Either at the midbrow or the crown. So could you say something about that? Is it recommended to visualize it at.

One place in some practices? Well, often they say trimba, they say at the eyebrows, but it doesn't mean it's on the outside of the body. It's at the center of the brain at eyebrow level. But when you visualize, you know, like if you paint it, you have to paint it on the outside.

If you paint it inside and then you paint the skin outside, you're not going to see it.

There are some practices where you do bring things outside of the eyebrows, though, because the central aperture is often visualized as coming up, coming to the amygdala and hippocampus, curving forward and coming right here.

So there are some practices in which, that is, things are done right there. It's also because the two apertures, side apertures, go to the nose, come up and go to the amygdala, hippocampus and curve down towards the nose.

There's also some practices done at the tip of the nose, the point right between the two side apertures. But in terms of the O Ma hum, generally, I think crown chakra, throat chakra and heart chakra. And that's the brain in Buddhism represents the body, doesn't represent the mind.

We think the brain is the processor of the mind. It's not the seat of the mind. The heart is the seat of the mind in Buddhism and I think in Asia in general. And the throat represents emotions and feelings and thoughts, the kind of emotional content or the fabric that consciousness takes.

The mood that consciousness takes, perhaps. So the brain is the shape that consciousness takes and the throat is the mood that consciousness takes. And the mind is just unformed consciousness. Okay.

Someone asked if I would say a little bit about just the five that we went through with the emotions and what is purified and what is protected from and so on with that practice.

So if we go down from the crown white vairochina, anger, irritation, and all the karmic formations created by anger and irritation. Like my brother in law in Canada, whenever he gets angry at the dog, he says, oh Phui, Hector, did you fart again? Oh Phui.

So he doesn't collect much negative karma through anger or irritation. He just has the karma to reborn in a thousand lifetimes using words like phui. And the throat, usually in this system is then connected with Amitabha Buddha.

So the brain with the Skandha of form, which means everything you see, smell, taste, touch, hair. And the throat with Amitabha which is the. In the perceptual process, the kind of mood or focus we bring that comes to what the brain processes.

Which is why the balancing of thyroid chemistry is so important for people's moods and feelings. And people who have problems with thyroid chemicals have mood, feeling, mood and sort of texture of experience. Challenges associated with passion, desire, longing.

Did you say passion?

Yeah, I mean, you know how you translate these words from Sanskrit. So desire, longing, craving, all of that. If you take 84,000 its share of the 84,000 that fall under that category. And then the heart chakra, which is consciousness, Consciousness. And when these take up, we go through the.

When these take up a wisdom factor. Then the crown becomes mirror, like wisdom, the throat distinguishing awareness. In other words, our perceptual process has a perfect crispness to it, very sharp, like a camera in perfect focus.

What did you say?

For the throat it becomes, becomes all distinguishing awareness. In other words, a kind of a super crispness to experience. And when people have thyroid problems, often one is of a kind of a. Either overly intense with subject object or not sufficiently engaged with subject object.

So perfect balance or tension in the engagement of subject, object and the heart with Akshobhya Buddha. And in this way then akshobhya becomes the element of space and the Klesha of kind of apathy, laziness, lassitude.

Often it's translated Tibetan word is timuk, which means a kind of a cloudy mind state be clouded and becomes chuyin yeshay becomes a wisdom of dharma Dhatu.

In other words, a very relaxed sense of the harmony of the spheres, the harmony of all things and the navel chakra, the Buddha, Ratna Sambhava, Rinchen, Jung ne in terms of the skandha, the skandha of feeling. But feeling here just means response, tone. I like, I don't like, I don't care.

Feels good, feels bad, I don't care. The way Everything we see, the very. A very early reaction is one of, I like, I don't like, I don't care. We look at a snake and we think, oh, what a beautiful animal. I like. Or a spider. Beautiful spider. I like scorpions.

Beautiful little scorpion with his clickers and his little tail. And then we look at a cat or a dog and we think, oh, my God, that thing carrying fleas, scratching and throwing dandruff everywhere. Hair all over my clothes. Correct.

I mean, the thing with snakes, pet snakes, they only shed their skin once a year or so. Then you can sell it to Taurus as a souvenir. And transforms into the wisdom of Nyam Yo Yeshaya, which experiences all things equally. The wisdom of equal valuedness of things, equal preciousness of things.

In other words, I like because of a precondition, I don't like because of a precondition, I don't care because of a precondition or the lack of a precondition. And the Buddha form is rinchen jungna ratna sambhava, source of wealth, source of abundance.

Because when we think, I like, I don't like, I don't care, the things we like become very small and the whole world becomes mostly, I don't like or I don't care. Why are we entertained? Because it's something we like. If we don't like it, it's not entertaining.

If we don't care, it's not entertaining. If we learn to have wisdom of equality, everything is equally entertaining. Like Stephanie, Very entertaining. You put up your hand.

Yes, I had a question about.

Yes, student, what was your question?

Transforms into wisdom that experiences all things equally. Is that right? Is that what you said?

Nyam nyong yeshay. In Tibetan, which means Nyam nyong means equal experience, equalized experience. Yum is equal. Nyeong is to experience.

Does that relate to equity?

Yes, that has a similar linguistic root. Although when we say equanimity as a spiritual practice is different than equanimity as a primordial wisdom. What? Why are you going like this?

Give us a little more on that.

Oh, okay, okay. Here we are. Got it clear. Now, as a practice, we're talking about living beings, and it's talking about affection for some, aversion for some, and cold uncaringness about others. And so it's in that limited way that we're talking about equanimity.

May all beings have happiness, and the cause of happiness, may all beings be free from suffering. And the cause of suffering. May all beings rest in joy without Negative side effects or negative consequences. Joy that does not produce negative side effects or negative consequences.

And may all beings rest in the equanimity for those types of souls that seem pleasant and those kinds of souls that seem unpleasant. So it's in reference to living beings in that practice of the four Brahma vihras.

As a skandha, it goes beyond living beings to everything, to foods and rocks and mountains and buildings and art. I very much like the Mona Lisa. She's the kind of woman I could hang on my wall as a trophy.

I don't like, I don't so much like, what was that lady who married the 99 year old Texan, then died of a drug overdose?

Nicole. Nicole. Yeah, that's right.

Yes, yes. So I'm not so much attracted to that type of lady. They don't make good trophies. It's very dangerous to make gender jokes in front of so many ladies, especially in a city like Chicago, which has the highest, one of the highest levels of personal gun ownership of any place in America.

Up here they don't even bother applying for the conceal and carry license. It's like piece of paper, who needs it? Yeah, so it's referring.

These are called Yeshe, which means a kind of primordial quality of the mind, a primordial wisdom quality of the soul that isn't necessarily activated at all in many people.

You know, it's always there underneath the darkness of whatever is dominating or the veils and curtains of whatever is there at the time. But we don't necessarily access it or activate it.

So the point of Tantra is to look at what's natural, what's there already in our treasure trove of video game assets. And these five yese nona, these five wisdom factors are actually all there.

Qualities of consciousness are always there, but we don't treasure them or look for them or access them or emphasize them. Often in ordinary life we'll just think, I like this, I don't like that. We won't think.

Well, in many previous lives when I was a blah, blah, blah, I happened to like that very much. Or you know, everything from all things in the universe, like, it always irritates me.

American films, when they say words like bullshit and horseshit, you know, it really gets on my nerves when people say that, because in India, like for instance, bullshit is one of the greatest building substances.

Half of the buildings in the Himalayas, including several that I lived in, were made of bullshit. And they were extremely good buildings. Much better than cement, much better than wood. They were cool in summer, warm in winter, dry in monsoon.

And so these things we say think, well, bullshit is a useless thing. I don't like or I don't care. But in reality, you know, for me, bullshit is such a wonderful thing.

For instance, when I was sleeping last night and my head is like this and it's touching the cold cement wall and I'm thinking, oh gosh, you know, if I let the cold sink too deeply into my knuckles, I'm going to have to punch someone tomorrow just to get the feeling back in that knuckle.

Who's coming? Oh, Eric, he won't mind. He's always game for anything. Or Richard, that would be okay. He likes to cry anyway. But if that was against a wall made of bullshit, that it would feel nice and warm and dry and wouldn't exude any negative quality except maybe smell.

Actually, the smell of bullshit is extremely sweet because they eat sweet grasses and they live, so it's extremely sweet, of course, when it's dried. And they also they mix it with sweet grasses when they make it into building material. So it carries a very sweet smell to it.

Not when it's drying, of course. When it's drying you stay away because there's flies and all for two days. So the day of the year, the two days of the year, three days of the year, your house is being bullshitted. Yeah, because you do it once a year basically.

And at that time usually, you know, you go away. You know, it's a process. It's like your home if you're, if your bathrooms in your living room are being renovated, you have to figure out something else to do for that day or two.

So you'll go visit a friend or go to a nearby hill station and take some hot spring baths and stuff like that and you come back. Anyway, the point is just that all things have a meaningful and beautiful quality in some way. It may not be for us in that time and that place.

And so the nyamno yeshaya is to see the preciousness of all people and all things in the bigger picture. Like people don't like human poo poo, but if it weren't for a human poo poo, humans would be humongously big.

They would grow like a kilo a day and by the end of a 90 year life they would be like a million kilos heavy.

And finally coming down to the root chakra, moga siddhi, the all accomplishing wisdom and the jealousy, envy and kind of negative competitism, negative competitive ism, and of course in the Buddhist world, we think you should be competitive in a very creative and a positive way, but not in a negative way.

When you see things you really like that make you feel envy or jealousy, it should be an inspiration. Like I look at the Mona Lisa hanging in the Louvre in Paris and I think, oh, maybe I could sneak in at night and take this home and hang it on my wall as a trophy. No.

But whatever it is that makes us feel jealousy and envy, we should translate or transform into a kind of a role modelism, you could say an object of our inspiration. I like that. I admire that. It's something worth emulating.

So we can look at the great masters, Dalai Lamas and Panchen Lamas and Buddhas and Bodhisattvas and we should feel a little bit of envious for them.

But that envy shouldn't be like, how can I trick them up and corrupt their enlightenment so they're down to my level, but rather, how can I be inspired by that greatness and achieve it myself? And therefore it transforms into the all accomplishing wisdom and the all accomplishing wisdom.

Again, it's a natural part of the human psyche. It's the Skandha of our karma, our momentum, our predispositions to activity. And when we let those run free unhindered and unrestrained, then we accomplish every task very easily, very joyfully and very quickly.

As I mentioned yesterday, I think each of these is given a sacred animal. So the human is, at the heart is a humanoid. And the root chakra is the green horse riding at full gallop, sometimes the winged horse, he can even fly.

So in the healing method that we learned, making the armor, the basharma, cleansing from inside and then cleansing by means of the chakra energies, waves of light and radiance and liquid from the chakra chakra energies, we essentially activate these five primordial awarenesses or these five wisdom factors.

Whatever illnesses or disbalance was created in our emotions and our thinking, by means of those fleshes are healed.

Whatever diseases therefore were to the disbalance to the elements of the body that was created by that negative energy is rebalanced, reattuned, and all illnesses that we presently have the immunity, the auto fixing system becomes focused and dedicated to fixing that problem.

And all illnesses and causes of illnesses are healed. And then of course, on the karmic level, a deeper level in this, in previous lives, all negative karma created by means of those actions of body, speech, mind, based on those five kleshas is healed.

Now, the texts say it's something like taking a barley seed and toasting it in an oven. It won't cancel, sprout. You haven't gotten rid of it, but it can't sprout, can't adversely affect you until you achieve the state of sainthood.

The third Bodhisattva level, the third path, the third stage of the five stages to enlightenment, to the first Arya level. Then it's still there, but at that point you've sort of deactivated it. It's like the bomb is still in the house, but you've temporarily taken out the fuse.

Texts speak of it kind of like that.

---

## PART 6
*Source: 06_Glenn Mullin - Healing through Meditation Mantra and Color Thera-03.txt*

Sake. So the eighth of the completion stage yogas, eighth and final of the completion stage yogas. In the first, we send out lights and pull back what has been, what life force has been lost through negative encounters with others, what has been lost, weakened, scarred and degenerated.

Secondly, pulling out in the four elements. Then thirdly, first the transforming qualities of the powerful beings of the earth, on the face of the earth and above the earth, the worldly being calling back all worldly, desirable qualities.

I think in ordinary Buddhism, Mahayana, they hope they'll either achieve enlightenment in one lifetime or if they can't, they'll take rebirth in a pure land, a Buddhist paradise. But in Tantra, we don't look for that very much. Mostly we think come back as a rigden, a knowledge holder.

A knowledge holder means a person who has develops lifetime upon lifetime, special qualities of communication and I suppose, inspiration, able to further the forces of goodness, light and enlightenment in the world.

So in the Bardo Tudal it says the best is if you can achieve enlightenment and become a Buddha in the Bardo. If you can't become a Buddha, if you don't achieve the best is achieve enlightenment in this lifetime. If you don't, you achieve it at the moment of death, clear light of the moment of death.

If you don't and you go in the Bardo, then as the Bardo visions appear, transform it into a mandala, and then transform the mandala into swim upstream in the Bardo back to the clear light mind and achieve enlightenment in the Bardo. If it can't do that, then you're going to have to take rebirth.

And so if you're not enlightened, you have to take rebirth. And the best rebirth is to take rebirth as a rigden, a knowledge holder. That's the equivalent of the Mahayana bodhisattva. I suppose in Mahayana you make a vow, may I come back in whatever form?

Or you make a prayer, whatever form is beneficial. I think I once mentioned to you, I interviewed the Dalai Lama in the early 80s when he said to a Polish newspaper reporter that he would be the last Dalai Lama. An Associated Press telexed me and said, glenn, please interview him on that.

It sounds to us, if you're going to have 14 lifetimes, why stop them? I said, well, if you don't come back, what will you do? And he says, oh, I'll come back as a dog or a bridge or a book or an incognito American like you.

And he was referring to a passage in one of the Mahayana Scriptures where it says the Bodhisattva doesn't just manifest in the human world and in human forms, but often manifests as books.

And people are feeling down in the dumps and they're lost and they don't know what they're doing with their life, and they pick up that book and they read it, and that suddenly they get a great epiphany, a great understanding, and their life transforms through that book.

And for that reason, I like to write books and publish books. And about once every week or so, I'll get an email from some stranger around the world who say, Glenn, 20 years ago I bought a copy of your blah, blah, blah, and I never read it.

And then two weeks ago I read it and it totally knocked my socks off. Or I read a book of yours about 30 years ago and it completely revolutionized my life. And we think that's not because I'm a great writer or not that because my books are greater than those of Geoffrey Hopkins or Bob Thurman or.

But I do get more letters like that than do they. We say it's the blessings of the three secrets of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. By the three secrets, it means the.

The mysterious ways in which the forces of enlightenment or the forces of goodness move in physical ways, spiritual, emotional, intellectual ways, and purely the body, speech, mind, thing. And sometimes they come back as a pet. You'll meet people who, you know, nobody on the whole planet can stand.

Being around them. It's like they're the most horrible beings you can imagine, and one minute with them is like three hours in a communist prison. But their dog will love them and bring them great happiness. So we say that's the mysterious workings of the spiritual forces on the three dimensions.

And a bridge. Someone's lost, and they just happen to come across a bridge and walk across it and find themselves saved.

And maybe the bridge wasn't there before or after just appeared mysteriously and sometimes as ordinary humans, you know, one of my best friends in Chicago for many, many years, Tim, who's now the President Heron of the International Society, mentioned to me as a young man, he bumped into a fellow who was part Indian and part African American, came back from the Vietnam War and set up, bought a house not too far from where Tim was staying at the time.

I think he was in college or something. And Tim bumped into him and was totally inspired by him. And he was an early. He was sort of a very strong theosophical practitioner. And Tim said it totally transformed his kind of experience and his life.

So in that way, even ordinary beings, without knowing they're exceptional, can be moved. Not to say he didn't know he was exceptional, but even ordinary beings can be touched by that dimension of things or that mysterious energy.

We ourselves can be touched in that way, touched by the grace of the universal energies of enlightenment that float everywhere. In Buddhism, we call that Buddha, Karma, or Trinle in Tibetan. That energy is always there and it's always flowing through us.

And of course, when we're driven strongly by karma and klesha, we don't notice it much or become much of a vessel for it. But when we relax into the universality of our being, that energy can flow through us and we can become a force of great inspiration to someone, just without even noticing it.

If I look back over my life, even when I was young, before I had any real spiritual education or training, on occasion something would happen with someone and that exchange would be very meaningful to them.

And if I look back over my own life as the subject of such things, on several occasions I met very ordinary people who gave ordinary. Gave extraordinary words of wisdom or exchanges with me that had very uplifting. So in Mahayana, it's like that.

In Tantrayana, we think the best is to come back as a Rigden Tantric master, because ordinary bodhisattvas are kind of limited by ordinary appearances. They're not as free to break, to break the rules of society to what is it fart in public?

Shantideva says you should always honor social convention unless it contradicts Dharma. That's kind of a Bodhisattva way of thinking. But in Tantra, you can be much more radical and so do exactly the opposite of social convention, just to kind of shake things up a little bit.

So in Barda Tudal, which is a Tantric text, it says, very good to be reborn as a Rigden Tantric master. And I think that page of absorbing the worldly powers has a little bit to do with that.

Below the earth, all of the forces of abundance of the earth, the mountain spirits, lake spirits, river spirits, tree spirits, all of the forces of nature, to have a special communion with them, a communication with them, and to have their blessings, their energies flowing through you and with you and always supporting you.

It's a very important aspect of Tantric practice. And for the upper worldly gods and Buddha, at the time of his enlightenment, Brahma and Vishnu, he thought, oh, I can't. He tried teaching for 21 days, and he taught the Abha Tamsaka Sutra. And nobody had a clue what he was talking about.

And so according this is the. In China, the Tendai Buddhists tell the story this way. Yeah, nobody had a clue what was going on. If you've ever read the Avatamsika, Tom Clary did a wonderful English translation known as the Flower Ornament Sutra. It was very big, it's like thousand pages.

And so then Brahma and Vishnu appeared and said, well, even though it's hard to get through to these thick headed humans, enlightenment is something very mysterious for them. Anyway, please give it a try and we will lend all of our support.

So paintings of the Buddha often show Brahma and Vishnu making offerings. And then the kings of the four, the kings are worldly dharmapalas of the four directions also come. So in Tantra, this side is emphasized.

So in the worldly practice in ordinary Buddhism, like Tara Hinayana Mahayana levels of our practice, we try to not take the worldly powers too seriously, not to look at them and even just regard them as symptoms.

But in Tantra, because Tantra is designed for people of whang pho rab, highest karmic propensity, such as all of us here. Therefore, if we get a few trillion dollars, we don't go. We're like Donald Trump, cool as cucumbers. We don't go overboard with it.

We still walk around with a crappy haircut and a shoddy suit and we fly to our teachings in one of those cheap like 747s he doesn't have like the expensive Lair, those 30 million dollar jets. He's like a simple $10 million J.

And so from the world of humans, as much fame, glory, wealth, power, elegance, talent in music and poetry and so forth as possible as we can maximize those within our own life as forms of communicating, as forms of uplifting and inspiring.

I think the idea is to see ourselves as instruments of light, instruments of joy, implements of transformation, vessels carrying that around the world. And for that reason, when I started training, the Dalai Lama said to me, now, Glenn, we don't need more Buddhists, we need more enlightened beings.

And that's his meaning, that whether one is a Buddhist doing this, a Christian doing this, a Muslim doing this, I mean, some of the greatest uplifters of humans have lived in the Muslim world.

For instance, some of the great Sufis, like Rumi being my favorite, then Kabir, these great, great beings manifest in whatever time and place to suit the needs and situations and the social environment. So myself, I chose to be reborn as a son of an Irish father.

The Irish are always laughing and happy. And a British mother descended from Sir Francis Bacon, a bastard child descended from. To bring the. Who wrote the Shakespeare plays. To bring the poetic excellence to expression. Didn't quite work out, but that was my plan.

Later I found out, oh, my mother just made that story up and my father's really French. But the idea is these worldly qualities, worldly powers, it's like anything else. The things we borrow to use for the good of self and others have to use for the good of self.

Because if self breaks down, the whole thing breaks down. If we're going to be a chauffeur, our car needs to be up and running and it should be in reasonably good condition. Otherwise it just rattles and clatters and, you know, we kill, roll off the road and damage people.

And when we send the lights through the above the world realms, all the heaven realms, the spacious realms, I think this is a little bit to do with Tantra is connected to that very ancient shamanic tradition from Siberia and Mongolia, as well as a very ancient Aryan Indian idea that we humans come from another planet.

We have a connection with the extraterrestrials. We are in fact, extraterrestrials crossbred with some of the better looking primates. Some of us cross bred with very good looking primates, others with less good looking ones.

Therefore, some humans are very handsome and very beautiful and others less so. So in the shamanic tradition, we came here riding on a winged horse. And many shamanic paintings show, you know, humans riding a green horse and the wings and they're coming down to planet Earth and they start.

And the ancient Aryan Indian tradition probably coming from the border of Persia and Russia, sort of northern Iran, that area where the Aryans, many archaeologists and anthropologists think, came from that area and down into India.

This idea of humans from a place called Akanista, another planet by the name of Akanista. Akanista literally means way up there. A is a negative and kanista means under. So under nothing like a top of the world. We came from the top of the world.

I think that's why when Irish people meet each other in the morning, they say top of the world to you. It's a tribute to our ancient Akanista heritage. And the thought is very strong there that as such we can quite easily generate those qualities that are common in those areas in those realms.

Clairvoyance and levitation and flying and walking through walls and remembering and reading past lives and all of these kind of things.

So when we take the precept of Rigden, a bodhisattva, Tantric bodhisattva means it comes back to achieve enlightenment in this lifetime as possible, if not at the time of death, the clear light of death, if not the bardo.

And if we find ourselves on the seventh downward spiral of the bardo, then quickly manifest as a tantric bodhisattva looking for a birth sperm ovum mixture genetically that will perfectly suit reincarnation as Tantric bodhisattva. And it's not a sure thing. I guess.

Some try, some fail, some succeed. But having the blessings of all the spirits of the mountains and the earth and the waters.

I remember in the late mid-80s, when the great Kansar Yeshaytub asked me to put together lamatores and bring over groups of a dozen monks and bring them around to a hundred cities at a time in America and Europe.

His main reason was humans are out of touch with the ngas, with the nature spirits and the spirits of the mountains and the rivers and the lakes.

And it's important to do nga propitiating rituals around the earth, because when the ngas are upset, humans get edgy, they can't sleep well, and they wake up grumpy, and things spiral downhill. And so he thought this was the best solution.

I suppose he could have recommended melatonin, but instead he recommended lamas on the road doing Naga repudiating rituals and teaching humans how to harmonize with the nature force, the forces of nature that are everywhere in our world.

And then we do the other level of that practice, which is the healing of our spiritual healing, sending out white light from the Amitayas in our heart and calling back the forces of compassion in the forms of Shenrezi and the Buddha of Compassion and all the forms of compassion that we can think of.

If we think Christ was compassionate, we can bring back lots of Christ. If we think. I don't know who else was compassionate? Mother Teresa. As an Irish Protestant, I don't bother with Mother Teresa. I send her loving and compassionate energy and good wishes.

I'm not sure if Christ was a Catholic or not. Was Christ Catholic? Hmm. Well, the Pope is. Is the Pope Catholic? Is the new Pope Catholic? But we think of the forces of compassion and the beings who have the blessings of all beings who have achieved enlightenment.

Past, present, future of the ten directions. So we symbolize that in Buddhism by Shenre Zi, the Buddha of Compassion, or Kuan Yin. But it can be. It is past, present, future, ten directions. So all Other traditions are great masters of compassion.

So because I love Rumi very much and all of his writings and his thinking and his stories, I always include him when I come back, draw him in and his blessing.

And secondly, we send out red light for the wisdom qualities and enter into communion with all of the wisdom beings, past, present and future. All of the wisdom qualities and wisdom masters come in the form of Manjushri and Manjushri mantras and Manjushri symbols like swords and books, etc.

And then Vajrapani with the blue light, the sense of power. So let's do that three together. Compassion, wisdom, power. And we can do them one by one, or we can do them separately, one after another, and we'll do for about two or three minutes. So just do it how you like.

Three lights at once and three qualities at once or one by one. And at the end you should really think that I am fully infused with a compassion equal to that of Christ or the Dalai Lama or Shinrazi or Buddha.

I am fully infused with the wisdom of Manjushri or a Rumi or a Buddha or Dalai Lama or whatever Nagarjuna. I am fully infused with the power of Vajrapani. And by the way, the early iconography for Vajrapani is drawn from Hercules. Many art historians say that at least.

So if we like Hercules, we can also bring him, but not Samson. He had a weak point for beautiful women, and that can be the downfall of a strong man. Mike Tyson learned that Varshopani is always blue. Shinrazy is white. Yeah, Vav. Yeah, yeah. But here we don't do it from the crown chakra.

Well, no, no. We're putting amitayas on our head. And Amitias hands the vase at the center of the vase, the mandala of Amitias. In his hands, little Amitias Sylva 3 sends out white lights and brings back Shenri overflows flows into our body via our crown aperture.

Manjushri overflows flows into our body by a yellow red, then blue flows in. And each time that we're completely infused, we become so compassionate that it's irritating to our neighbors.

They start doing things like playing loud music at night and throwing garbage in our lawn just to see if they can irritate us.

Om Amarani Jivantayas Omarani Jeevantaya so aha rani Jeevantayas Oha Omrani Jeevantaya soha Omaran ne Jeevantaya soha Omamarani Jeevantaya soha Omamrani Jeevantaya Soha Omarande Jivantaya soha omni and when you're finished with the compassion, one just try to feel as though this energy of white light compassion totally absorbs into your muscles and your bones and your cells.

In Tantra we say compassion is more to do with the body. Wisdom is more to do with speech and thinking and emotion. Power is more to do with core spirit and wisdom. Hershara means best awareness.

So we try to generate the sense with the red and Manjushri that this sort of luminous, radiant, joyful quality pervades consciousness, pervades emotions, pervades intellect, pervades all corners of the mind, of the thinking emoting mind. O Mamarani Jeevantaya.

So and with the blue, as though it's a kind of a formless and vast as the sky, and it pervades the formless vastness of our, you could say core spirit or core soul or core awareness.

It.

Omarani Jeevantaya soha so up to this point, we see ourselves in our ordinary form, Amitayas on our head in Generation Stage Yoga.

The eighth yoga, which Generation Stage Yoga, which is the fourth, when we put them in four categories, is absorbing the powers of the called absorbing the powers of life. But it really means absorbing the blessings of the lineage.

And so we see ourselves in our ordinary form and above our head, an Emitias who is our own teacher, the one from whom we receive Amitias transmission above him, the one from whom he received or she received transmission above.

They all look like amitayas, but it goes back through the generations to the Dalai Lamas and the Panchayan Lamas and then the great, great Shalu Lamas.

Shalu was a school of Tibetan Buddhism and goes back from them to the Drikung Khargyu and goes back from them to Kampopa Milarepa, Rechungpa, goes back from them to India to the great female mystic Trobegyalmo. And we do the recite the mantra.

And with each from the top down, one of the generations melts into light and falls like snow onto the one underneath. And we absorb all the wisdom and all of the healing powers and healing knowledge and healing abilities of all those beings. They're dead and gone.

And now all of what they had comes to us. And if we do well, we can achieve that same level of great healing, great healing power, great transformation power. And the long texts mention everyone all the way back to Buddha, one by one. And the medium texts just mention the Key one.

So it usually goes Buddha, Amitayas, the female mystic tribe, Gyalmo. Then it usually skips to Ray Chungpa, Milarepa, Kampopa, Pama, Trukpa, Pama, Trogpa gave it to Jigdansungan. And then for whatever other school, for some other school rather than Drikung.

From Drikung, it spread to many schools into Shalu and Galugba, Ralug, Sakya and Yingma. Many, many people receive that same lineage. So whatever lineage from there, we just mention our favorite people in that lineage. So the short prayers usually just mention five or six like that.

So in my short practice of it, I do it. Buddha, Mithayas, Trube, Gyamo, the female. Then I do rechungpa. I skip Milarepa. I like rechungpa better. I go to Jigdam Singh Gan, the founder of the Drikung School. And then I skip down to the first Dalai Lama. And I skip down to myself.

They come into me, and that's all I bring in. But the long texts mention everyone from every generation or the main person from every generation in that unbroken lineage.

So if you go to a monastery and say, Amdo, northeastern Tibet, a monastery will have a lineage that was perhaps brought there 600 years ago. So from that point on, the lineage is the lineage of transmission within their area.

Or if you go to Qam, they will have, you know, say, a Dzogchen monastery or something like that. From the time it came there. It may be transmitted as a lineage of practice and realization exclusively within their lineage. But myself, I like Buddha, Amitayas, Truboglmo, then Ray Chungpa.

Sometimes I throw in Milarepa.

Don't do him any favors.

What?

Don't do them any favors.

I let him join the party. And I always throw in Jigdam Singha, the founder of the Drikon School. Because Gone Popa gave his hat to Pama Chukpa, meaning of Gone Popa's four great disciples, one of whom was a Karmapa.

But of the four great ones, the main one, the one of whom he gave his hat, the symbol of the final authority on his lineage was Trubeygyama. Was a. Was Parma Trupa. And Parma Truppa had many thousands of disciples, brought eight of them to enlightenment.

And he gave his hat to Jigtan Sunghan, the founder of the Drikung School. So he's considered to be the final or highest transmission in that generation. And then the first Dalai Lama.

Because for me, because, well, I translated a lot of his books and received a lot of his lineages, but also he wrote one of the most extensive commentaries in the Tibetan tradition, and, you know, spent time in Drikung monastery and received them, spent time in Shalu, received that lineage, and received the lineage Tsangkapa had and various others, and fused them all together for his great commentary.

So we say the mantra, as we dissolve those generations, then it comes down to our guru, who melts into light and dissolves into us. And then we think that the full blessing of the lineage and all the qualities of all those great masters is now absorbed and transmitted to us.

And we have the capacity to achieve those levels of enlightenment, realization, Siddhi, Tantric masterhood and so on that all those great masters achieved, if we just make a little bit of effort to do so. O ma rani jeevantaya soha.

And when it dissolves into us, we absorb all of those qualities and realizations, and we transform into an infinite, vast radiance filling the whole universe.

In other words, we achieve enlightenment, the great joyful, blissful radiance, and then we can sit there in Dharmakaya meditation for as long as we wish, which is similar to Vipassana, similar to Rinzai Zen and Choge Korean Zen, similar to certain forms of Mahamudra and Dzogchen in the Tibetan world, for as long as we wish.

And we'll just do it very briefly here. And then we come out of it in the form of Amitias. So now we're no longer in our ordinary bodies. We're little Amitias. You're looking rather red. You must be an Amitias. Where is your healing vase? Oh, it's in your hands, in your lap.

And then when we get up from our meditation session during the generation stage, we see ourselves as Amitias. We see the world as a paradise filled with healing herbs and healing minerals and pulsating with healing gods and goddesses everywhere, angels and angelettes.

And as the Sukhavati paradise and the mandala of Amitabha, Amitias. So I want to just go through a couple of the completion stage ones.

And the first one we looked at yesterday was we look at the navel chakra, heart chakra, throat chakra, crown chakra, just those four chakras, eight petal lotus at the heart, 16 at the throat, 32 at the crown, 64 at the navel.

In the navel chakra, a red Amitias, not in union, and at the crown, not necessarily in union. And at the crown chakra, white Amitias and The red represents the genetic. The genetic makeup inherited from our female ancestors.

But did you say at the navel? It's red?

Navel chakra is red. Yes.

And the heart was what?

And the crown is white, Amitias, representing the genetic materials inherited from our male ancestors. Also representing our spiritual femaleness and maleness from our instincts, from previous lives, and representing our passion and our aggression, those two forces.

And then either doing the vase breathing or not doing the vase breathing, we do with the four elements, or the five, if we wish. First, yellow for earth, white for water, element, red for fire element, green air element, and blue for balance or harmony.

And we can do one at a time, or we can do all five at once. And because we don't have much time just to review, we'll do all five at once. We breathe in. We can either do vase breathing or just breathe deeply.

And as we breathe in, we turn the mind to the navel chakra and just recite a few mantras, either quietly or if we make a sound as though we're breathing slow, like Omara Rani Jeevantayas Omrani Jeevantayas Omarani Jivantaya. And as we do that, we turn the attention to the VAs in his hands.

The HRI at the center sends out yellow, white, red, green and blue lights and pulls back the essences of all the elements. They come.

And the yellow brings all of the elements in the form of great mountain ranges, Himalayas and Andes and so on and so forth, and great rock storms and even great earthquakes and water as oceans and rivers and lakes, and even great floods and fire as the sun and all the stars in the universe and so on, and even the fire that destroys civilization.

And then green for all the hurricanes and tornadoes and windstorms and so on, and even the great windstorm that just destroys civilization at the end of an era. And all of this comes into the vase, which overflows.

And the overflow flows into the navel chakra and completely heals the four elements and the balance of the four elements.

And here it turns into, when it melts and boils, turns into a red nectar, red emerald, the essence of female menstrual blood, or the essence of the ovum factor, and flowing into the 64 channels, completely opens and heals and rejuvenates.

Then we turn to again, and we do it again, and this time sends out again lights of five colors and brings them in the essence of the five elements. And it overflows. And this time the overflow rises from navel chakra. To heart chakra.

Chakra flows into the eight channels and revives and heals and restores the four elements and their balance and especially the female element associated with those chakras. Then we turn to the navel chakra again and it sends out the five lights.

Amamarani ji vantaya soamaranijivantayas Amamamani jivantaya soha. Brings back the essence of the five elements and transforms and melts and becomes red emerald female substance. Rises up the central channel and rises to the heart and then rises up to the throat chakra.

Flows into all 16 channels of the throat chakra and totally revives and heals and restores and especially revives, heals and restores the female element.

Again, turn the attention to the navel chakra and to the vase and amitayas hands and sends out lights and brings in the essence the five elements in the five colors and brings them in and the forms as described before.

Melts, boils, becomes red female nectar rises up to the heart chakra, to the throat chakra, and then rises up to the center of the brain chakra, flows into the 32 channel petals and totally heals, restores and especially restores the female element. Omamarandi jeevantayas. Omamarani Jeevantayas.

Omamarandi Jeevantayas. Omamarandi jeevantaya soha. Then we do the downward moving.

We turn the mind to the white Amitayas in the crown chakra, the essence of our male ancestry and the essence of our male quality, our quality of aggression and the essence of all of the energies collected as males in previous lives, etc. Etc.

Sends out the five colored lights into the universe from the center of the vase and the hands and brings back their five elements. They enter the vase and melt and boil and become the essence of male energy.

White nectar overflows and flows into the crown chakra, completely healing the 32 channels and opening the 32 channels and healing the male element in the 32 channels. Send out again the five colored lights.

Go out from the white Amitayas and the vase in his hands in the crown chakra and fill the universe and bring back the essence of the five elements. And they come and fall and flood into the little vase and completely melt and boil and turn into white male substance.

Overflow and descend down the crown chakra, coming to the throat chakra, flowing into the 16 channel petals, totally healing and awakening, restoring the male element. Okay, now we turn the attention back to the Amitayas of in the Crown chakra and to the vase.

And at the center of the vase, Red 3 sends out light, fills the universe, pulls back the essence of the five elements, boils and overflows, turns into white male substance, overflows and descends through the crown to the throat to the heart chakra into the eight channel petals, completely heals and rejuvenates, and in particular restores the male element of the heart chakra, Soha.

Again turning the mind to the vajrasattva. Now to the hemitayas in our crown chakra, the vase.

Center of the vase, sends out lights of five colors, brings back essence of five elements, melts and boils, transforms into white male essence, overflows, comes down through the crown to the throat, to the heart and to the navel chakra and flows into the 64 channel petals, totally rejuvenating and restoring and healing.

And in particular completely rejuvenates the male element in the navel chakra. Omarani Jeevantayas. Omarani Jeevantayaso. Omarani Jeevantaya Soha.

So that's the first of the completion stage yogas and works with healing the five elements in terms of both male and female quality, both with upward rising and downward flowing. The upward rising and the navel chakras associated.

Because I want to ask about what about the secret chakra, sexual chakra. Normally if we say navel, it includes all the lower chakras. If we just make a four chakra system and we say the crown chakra, it includes both of the upper chakras, that and the chakra at the top of the brain.

Now I'd like us to try the second of them a little bit just before we take our midterm break and have our midterm exams. And this one takes a little bit of concentration. Some people get a little bit dizzy doing it, but I think it's a very good brain exercise.

So red amitias in the navel chakra, white amitias in the crown chakra. Now, some texts say if it's difficult having amitias and the vase and inside the vase, the mandala at the center of that mandala, inside the vase, an amitias, and inside of his vase, the letter.

You can just put a vase or what is it you call it, a vase. And sometimes in San Mandalas, they just put the vase because it's much easier to draw than it is in small than it is to draw. An amitias with sand, powdered sand.

And we start with the in breath, we breathe out and the Mind is on the Amitayas in the navel chakra. And as we breathe out, red overflows from the vase and flows into the navel chakra and totally heals and rejuvenates the navel chakra.

As we breathe in, white overflows from the Amitayas vase in the crown chakra and flows into the 32 channel petals of the crown chakra. Then we breathe out, and it rises from the navel. The red rises from navel to heart. We breathe back in.

The white comes down from crown to throat chakra and totally heals the throat chakra. We breathe out, the red moves up from heart chakra to throat chakra. We breathe in, the white comes down from throat chakra to heart chakra and flows into the heart chakra. Totally healing.

We breathe out, the red rises from throat chakra to crown chakra, flows into the 32 channel petals and totally heals. We breathe in, the white flows down from heart chakra to navel chakra. So we'll start that just kind of slowly and just keep your own pace. Don't worry about other people's.

So is it kind of clear how it's working? You're changing your intentions. Okay. With each time going up, you put the mind on the navel chakra. Going down, you put the mind on the crown chakra. Starting again. Right. The breath is in, breathe out. Diffuses. Overflows and diffuses. Breathe in.

White overflows and diffuses. Breathe out. Red comes up, Diffuses. Then breathe in. White comes down. So without the red comes up and within, the white comes down. And so they're just kind of going like this.

And then did you also say at that point it sort of continues as a flow of red and white up and down?

You just repeat the process for a designated time. I'll do this for five minutes or 10 minutes.

But I had the impression when we were going through the exercise that it did become kind of like a more continual flow rather than, like, staged, maybe because of the. When you're focused on one chakra at.

A time, I think you just do it as you do it. Ching. Then you repeat Ching. Then you repeat Ching. You know, each time in the four stages.

Each time as stages.

Yeah. Out, breath comes up. Out. Breath in. Breath comes down. Out breath comes up. In, breath comes out.

And if it becomes. If it starts to feel like more of a flow, that's.

I think you can just, at any point, just relax it and just, you know, basically put the mind on the two Buddha forms, male and Female at the crown and heart, and the white and red liquids and the healing work they're doing in the other two chakras and just not have any movement.

Just put your mind on that image. In other words, relax the breath and don't do any more up and down. You should feel some strong balancing, healing and transformation within yourself. I think, you know, with all these practices you can do in three ways.

One you can do is by count how many breaths you're going to do. One you can do is by 5 minutes, 10 minutes, 15 minutes. One you can do is by sign until you have a particular kind of feeling tone in the core of your body. Just choose which one you like to do. There is no mantra. No mantra? No.

Okay, the next one, we turn the mind to white Amitias, red Amitias. And we put the mind on white Amitias in the crown. And he's very radiant and very healing and very powerful. And he is sitting on a moon disc, just like the red amitayas at the navel is sitting on a sun disc.

Of course, the moon representing the male energies and the sun the female energies. And as you put the mind on the moon disk, it gets more and more intense, brighter and brighter. And then the moon radiates or releases a double, like a cell reproducing and producing two.

Or like wax dripping from a candle, or like drops falling from an eyedropper. And that comes down through the. So then the white drop comes down from the crown chakra, comes to the throat chakra, to the heart chakra, and to the navel chakra.

As it comes to the navel chakra, it transforms into a white goddess and enters into sexual union with Amitias, solitary Amitias at the navel chakra. And Mrs. Amitias becomes very happy with this and is filled with great bliss and great passion.

And the heat gets stronger and stronger from the great bliss and the great passion. And her sun disc emanates a double.

And the double moves up the central channel, comes up to the heart chakra, up to the throat chakra, and up to the crown chakra, where it transforms into a red goddess and enters into sexual union with white amitayas.

So let's do that first with white from the crown chakra and emanates a double comes down, touches each of the chakras, and each of the chakras gives rise to great pleasure. The tantric texts say that the pleasure of the drop passing through the chakras equals the pleasure of a hundred orgasms.

And then we do the vase breathing. And when we do the vase breathing, we look at the red Amitayas in union with the white goddess at the navel chakra. And particularly we look at the point of their, the point of the union of the sexual organs.

And we put our attention there and we take the bas breath and we breathe energy and we press into the navel chakra. And from that point of the great union comes great bliss and great radiance and sends out light into the ten directions.

Sending out light into ten directions brings back the essence of all healing energies and all healing powers. And this comes to that point and then overflows, in other words, the vulva. The vulva of the consort is something like the mouth of a vase and then overflows and flows into the navel chakra.

And the red liquid completely heals the naval chakra and then rises up with each vase breath. And we do another vase breath and it rises to the heart and then rises to the throat and rises to the crown.

In other words, by means of the great bliss and the great passion, utilizing the primordial creative energy, which is a kind of a sexual quality, the healing of the chakras is performed. So let's try that with. Is that clear? Should we try it with four breaths? Do four breaths.

Then we do the same the other way around. We turn the mind to the white amitias in the crown chakra in union with red goddess to the point of their sexual union. And at that point the great bliss and the great ecstasy of union.

And we send out light and radiance and we do the vase breathing, pressing into the navel chakra. But imagining that the energy of the pressing is happening in the crown chakra, lights go out and pull back the essence of all healing powers.

And it flows into that point where the vulva becomes the vas. And then this releases white liquid that comes down, travels down to the heart chakra, to the throat chakra, navel chakra and heart chakra, and navel chakra. So let's do four breaths like that. So we can either do it.

That red liquid rises from below or from below, just a simple red drop comes up and from above that white liquid descends, or that a white drop descends.

And in either case, the red drop and the white drop is the essence of all healing energies, but essentially rising, healing our feminine side, our female side, and our female genetic structure, and the white descending healing our male side.

And in this, because the female associated with the sun healing our warmth, friendly, wise, open, wisdom factor, and the Male, our cool, calculated, calculating, not sort of cooling quality and our aggression quality.

It.

So is that clear? And then the final one we'll do today is the Vajra recitation. Actually, we really have two more. We have Vajra sacitation and establishing a mystical seal at the heart. So let's do establishing the mystical seal at the heart. First we look at the male and female Amitayas.

White above and red below. Sitting on sun disc and moon disk. And we take a Vajra breath. And we hold the Vajra breath. But imagining we're pressing the energies to the heart.

And as we hold then from above, the white moon disc releases a double and descends and comes down and comes to the heart chakra with the first breath. With the second Vajra breath, the red at the navel rises and comes to the heart chakra. And at the center of the heart chakra, the syllable Hung.

We can just see the hung is kind of a blue radiance. If we don't like to use Sanskrit or Tibetan letters. It's just kind of shaped, kind of swirling like this, you could say. Or we can make it like a blue bar of light. Just kind of curly like this. Like a zigzaggy kind of shape.

And the hung hair represents our primordial consciousness. The mother eclair like consciousness. The consciousness that rides from this lifetime to the next. The white and red representation. The manner in which the white and red drops gather at the heart at the moment of death.

After all, coarse energies and coarse sensual energies and energies coursing through the body have been collected together and sedated, stilled by means of the. As it says in Kalachakra Tantra, the yoga of sense withdrawal. And for this we then hold the breath for as long as we can at the heart.

With the Hung being the consciousness that travels from lifetime to lifetime. And the white and red being the quintessence of the energies as they are now. After the many transformations they have experienced since the time of our birth.

In other words, from the time of our birth, every time we've done something and said something and met someone, eaten something, thought something, felt something, our energies have transformed. And so the Vajra and then so we bring it down to the heart.

And this is the mystic seal at the heart or the secret seal at the heart. So we finish the former practice. By doing this practice, we bring the white down to the heart and the red up to the heart.

And sandwiched in between the syllable Hung, the five wisdoms, our primordial consciousness that travels from lifetime to lifetime, carrying the essential quintessential learning experiences with it. So let's just do three or four breaths like that.

First at the crown chakra, then the white descends, then a navel chakra, and the red sun disc rises. And then at the heart chakra, and the white and red come together as a single drop. White above, red below. And in their center, the blue radiance.

The blue like a bar of lightning or a shining Darth Vader sword from the early Star War movies, not from the remake. And then we just, for the remainder of that meditation, we just essentially put the mind on the hung, on the radiance at the center of the white and red drop.

And totally what you call detach from any sensory experience. Just allow the silence of being in that deepest cave of our soul. Allow that silence to set in. O mama rani cvantaya soha.

And then the eights where we do it much the same, but with the vajra recitation, we just put the mind at the hung at the heart. We breathe in with Om, we breathe in with the sound of Om, and then we bring it down the side channels into the central channel, and we bring it to the heart chakra.

And then we hold it at the heart chakra with the sound of hung, Hung being the syllable that is at the heart chakra. And we hold as long as is comfortable. And as we breathe in, we imagine that we're breathing in the essence of all the five elements.

We go through the things that we did in the generation stage. First we can breathe and we can do it with the different colors. First we breathe in the life that was lost and the essence of the five elements and the blessings of all the powerful worldly deities and spirits and forces of nature.

Then the compassion, wisdom and power. Then the blessings of the lineage, we can do them individually with each breath, and we can do them all in a very general way. If we're like Stephanie, a Mahamudra type, we like the simplicity of the pure nature of being.

We can take it all in with one breath, breath. Is that correct, Stephanie? Mm. So we breathe in with Om. And as we breathe in, it's the essence of all healing essences, the eight levels of healing that we did on the generation stage, and we dissolve that into the home with the sound of home.

And we imagine that that healing is therefore happening on this very deep level. Not a healing of the body, not a healing of the thoughts or the emotions, but the healing at the very core of our spirit. And when we can't hold much longer. We let out with ah. And ah is the sound of wisdom.

As I mentioned before, the. And so it's releasing the essence of wisdom, releasing with wisdom power. So it's known as the Vajra essence. It said people who become good at it can hold their breath for very long, extended periods of time.

The Dalai Lama had some of the yogis above Dharamshala tested and they'd hold their breath for 10 or 15 minutes, 20 minutes, without much difficulty. But here we don't want to try to do anything like that. The simple practice from the point of view of healing is just breathing in healing essence.

And in all the tantric yoga systems, as far as we find it in Yamataka, Tantra, Chakrasamvara, Hevajra, all the highest yoga of Buddhist tantras have their own form of what's known as doji depa vajra recitation, literally vajra recitation. Breathe in with Om, hold with hung, release with ah.

And it's usually done after tummo as one of the deeper yogas after you've become proficient at tummo or the inner heat yogas. Now, with holding at the heart, it's said to do so very gently, or you can make yourself jittery and jumpy and irritable, irritating and irritable, easily irritated.

For that reason, the yogas always start with a navel chakra, which is a sexual quality and therefore a kind of a feel good quality, a joyful quality, sort of a universally free, open quality.

And again, the crown chakra is a little bit to do with the feel good chemistry of the brain, like dopamine and the various peptides and so on. So at the heart, when we do, we don't want to do for extended periods of time, just do it at the end of the meditation session.

If you do these completion stage yoga, do it for a few moments at the end of the session to sort of bring the essence of the realization into the very core of your being. Okay, so let's conclude by doing a few of the mantras, Omarani jivantayasoha together O Mama rani jivantaya soha.

And if any of you, when you get the initiation, often you get a transmission like this and an explanation like this of the basic practice with each person. It's up to you to experiment however much or however little you wish.

As I mentioned before, it's good to do a few Amarani mantras, you know, a few every day when you're driving to work or, you know, brushing Your teeth or omarani ji rantaye. So then you're gargling. That way you don't forget the mantra and it becomes easy to do.

And if you receive initiations, you get mantras and you don't use them at all, then you forget the process. That's very good. If once a month at least, you can do one session of the practice. As I mentioned, many lamas will do a nyenthun will dedicate one day a month to doing the practice.

Others will dedicate a day in the year or a weekend in the year, or a trubjen, ten days a year. And some people will just do it, like from time to time. But it's good to do the mantra three or seven or 21 times, just for a few minutes each day while you're walking around.

It's a beautiful mantra, easy to say. Omarani jin thaye so ha, my life force. Strong, strong, ha ha. And it helps. At the very least, it won't harm in any way. And at the best, it brings some kind of joyful quality, a celebratory quality.

And that joyful quality at least boosts your mood and your feeling of. I think one of the great benefits of tantra that I feel from it personally is when you send out lights and you bring back blessings of all the enlightened masters, past, present and future.

And the they all come and they all dissolve into you. You never get lonely and you have good company and the nice things with Buddhas and bodhisattvas and these beings, when you call them, they never argue with you.

No, but I think it is a very good daily practice in some form to make that sense of our connection with that element of things otherwise, especially in these kind of times in America, when everyone puts their mind on, like, well, what did Donald Trump say and what did Clinton say and what's going on with isis?

And what about this bombing here and shootings there? It comes to feel like it's a very chaotic, cold, mean, miserable world filled with idiots and violent types. In fact, you know, the idiots and the violent types are a small minority.

I can't remember which political party they belong to in America. It's one of the two big ones, I think. But really those things are really very small in the world. The number of violent episodes compared to the numbers of acts of random kindness are very, very small.

Of course, war zones are different. In those war zones, things are difficult. And it's very good of practice like this. If we're concerned, if we try to send Healing energy with this kind of practice to those areas.

I don't know if any of you noticed, but in recent years, the Dalai Lama every year dedicates, when he gives a teaching and whatnot, very often, you know, it'll generate a large sum of money.

And 40% goes to the refugees in India, and 30% goes to local organizers for whatever they think is important for building spiritual things in the West. And 30% goes to a charity of their mutually agreed.

And of course, Dalai Lama, nobody argues with him if he says, I think we should put it to blah, blah, blah. It's not that common that people say, hey, you're wrong. It should go. And then you say, okay, I'll arm wrestle you. Whoever wins it goes there.

You could do what Clinton and Bernie Sanders did and just toss a coin, I suppose with two heads.

They switched whether it was head or tails.

No, no, but one coin with two heads and one coin with two tails. And then. But anyway, here's the 30% that goes to mutually agreed upon every year for the last 10 or 15 years. Dalai Lama has always encouraged sending that third to one of the places of conflict, like Kalachakra in New York.

I think they sent $500,000 to the conflict area in Sudan for the refugee relief and to other areas. But from our side, if we do this practice, if we see something like that on the news, we can go to our meditation cushion and sit down and generate a sense of.

My body is a ball of light, amitayas on my head, in the mah vase, in his hands, mandala in the vase, center of the mandala, little amitayas at the center of that vas. And the light goes out and brings in the essence of all the blessings and wealth and success and peace and healing.

And it overflows, and the overflow goes to that conflict area. And sending a kind of brain wave like that, a brain emanation. I think it has some kind of subliminal effect things. I think if you get 10 people in a room all thinking compassion thoughts, you get a kind of a compassion atmosphere.

We get 10 angry people in the room. There's a kind of an angry feeling in the atmosphere without anyone looking at anyone. Just brainwaves have their own power. I think in the west, we haven't tapped them very much yet, the idea of brain waves. But in Tantra, it's considered to be very important.

So when we want to help with anything, if there's a famine somewhere, of course, it's nice if we can send some money, if we're wealthy or send a pair of slippers if it's in a place where they need slippers or blankets or whatever.

But even more important than that is the motivation to help, the motivation to care. And it's important in these conflicts, I think, not to think one person is right and be angry at the other. And we often get that.

I think especially in North American intellectual world, we're such a polarized society. Everyone's always someone's right and someone's wrong.

And we try to send in the Buddhist world, we think everyone is right in one their own idea, they're right, and that's why they're doing what they think they're doing. Even if they're wrong, they think they're right. And both people also have some involvement in the wrongness.

So to send healing and transformation to both, as in Stephanie's favorite story about the rape of Yeshe Sogyal, by her sending good thoughts to those rapists, they were healed. So it wasn't. She just sent healing energy to herself to get over the trauma of rape.

She sent healing energy to the rapists for them to get over the bad habits and the mental and emotional makeup and the kind of psychic state that would be that would give rise to that.

And if we think of what happens in Syria and Iraq and Libya and many of the places of conflict right now, it's a little bit like that. People are killing and people are being killed. And we can always say one side is right and one side is wrong.

But it's only from a particular perspective that that's the case. And we send healing energy to both sides. And if we send healing energy, like every day, for instance, I think Hillary Clinton is wrong in most things, so I send her some healing energy.

And poor old Donald Trump, he also gets so many things wrong. I try to send some heal energy. And Bernie Sanders, I send him some Braille cream for his hair.

But I think the beginning, you know, we hear people talk about universal love and love and love, but then when we get into this person is in the right and this person's in the wrong, we don't feel that energy of love for the person that we're saying is in the wrong doing, we don't feel any love for them or any.

So in terms of what's happening in Syria, whether we like, say, Assad or we don't like Assad, whether we like the Kurds or we don't like the Kurds, when we send.

So Dalla Lama always sends prayers, and he has his Monastery, do prayers for it, and then he'll send whatever was the part from that particular event, $30,000, $100,000, a half million dollars, send it over to help with the healing on both sides.

I think one reason why he likes Bishop Tutu a lot was after the apartheid. Tutu worked very hard at keeping people out of the let's have revenge on whoever wronged us during those years.

You know, if the people I've wronged in this life were to line up and who have any complaints about me, I'd have at least two or three complaints and perhaps even three or four. Who knows? And if we go back to past lives, it'll like double and triple for each lifetime.

If we go back a million lifetimes and lineup of people with complaints about something that happened. Mosquitoes I've slapped, cockroaches I've squished, you know, all kinds of things we do in our life that in the context of that being, we may think it's just a cockroach, it's just, just a mosquito.

But actually that mosquito thinks, hey, I'm more valuable than you. If you want to kill someone, go shoot yourself, as the cockroach would have that same opinion, wouldn't it? When it comes to a choice of you go or I go, most beings will chose let it be him.

And for that reason, in Buddhism, Mahayana Buddhism in the general, but in Tantric Buddhism in particular, we try to assess, send healing energy to both.

If we think one is in the wrong, then we can send what we call wrathful energy, like red wrathful or blue black wrathful energy to defeat or overcome that wrongness.

But not out of anger, not out of hatred, not out of dislike, but in order to prevent those beings from collecting what we think is more negative karma through doing bad things, horrible things, like people who rob and rape and kill and so on and so forth, sending them wrathful energy to forcefully follow them.

They're on their way to rape someone and they fall down and break a leg, so they can't go there. And at the same time, the rock happens to bounce into their testicles and crush their testicles. So thereafter they cannot get an erection, so cannot rape.

But we don't do it to harm them, but to prevent them from such a, what do you call, unproductive endeavor, and an endeavor that brings negative karma to them, brings harm to others, and doesn't help anyone. So the healing yoga can be used for oneself.

If one has friends who are ill, one can use it for them. Essentially, one does it seeing oneself as amitayas. And from the vase, then the lights go out and overflow and they flow to whoever is the person you're trying to heal. It's very common in the Tibetan world and Central Asian world.

If someone's ill, they'll invite a practitioner of this system who's completed the retreat and the fire rite with a certain amount of mantras or time or however they've done it. And at the end, done a kind of concluding fire rite. You fire, right?

You burn off any, like, obstacles to being able to practice it properly. And it doesn't have to be done in a ceremonial way. It can be done in a very simple way. And then one can become a professional healer through the sort of shamanic power.

Otherwise one could just do mantra and visualization to help. And I think it helps very often, very much. I've seen it myself in my own life in many, many times. And I think the more we do it, the better we become at it, the more confidence we have it.

I think it's important to keep it kind of discreet. Sometimes people, I'll do healing energy for you. It becomes a little bit, like, irritating. Often when I travel around, I'll stay in places where people are healers. Oh, can I do a healing? I always point out, actually, I'm in perfect health.

There is no need. But it will anyway. Oh, there's no need. I'm completely perfect as is.

But quietly and discreetly, if our child is sick or a friend or a loved one or anyone with whom we have a close connection, if we do a session with the sadhana and with the mantras and with the visualization, we can have great confidence that that will be an energy booster for them.

And one of my great gurus, when he was traveling through Texas, once did it for a lama, for a very famous lama who was in a coma. And the students pressed him to do it, and he didn't want to do it, but he said, oh, no, no, he's like a great guy. You should just let him do his own thing.

Please do it, please. So he did. And then the guy sat up in the middle of coma and looked at him and said, why didn't you let me die? I was ready to go, why didn't you let me die? And Rinpoche said, dumas, sorry about that, but your students insisted, okay? And he lived for another couple of months.

But I think when we do send people good thoughts and good feelings and good energies, they can sense it, and their whole body and mind and emotion respond to it. For that reason, we should also not think negative thoughts about others.

And hateful thoughts about others can also project that kind of negative energy onto them. And in the world of shamans, they talk about white shamans and black shamans, the ones who mostly work for good, and those who do also will do accept clients who want someone cursed or harmed in various ways.

So from our side, we should try to do as much as we can to benefit ourselves and to benefit all others. As I said at the beginning, the key to all Tantric practice is based on the Bodhisattva motivation of Bodhichitta.

Whatever we do in our practice should be to achieve enlightenment in order to be of greater benefit to all. And if we are ill, then our energies are difficult to practice. If we have great accidents and problems, that can be obstacles to practice.

So by taking care of ourselves through regular healing meditations and healing yogas such as these shouldn't be just to extend our life or be stronger, healthier, and so on, but to make ourselves into greater vessels of goodness and of enlightenment for benefit of all sentient beings.

---

